Alice, Saintfield.  Interview: 12th August 1999 and 20th September 1999

AD:	Well, my name is Alice D.  That’s my married name, of course, my maiden name was S., Alice S. and I was born in Belfast.  My father died when I was only two years old so my very young mother, twenty-three, was a widow.  My brother was born after he died and she brought the three of us up.  In those days, there was no widow’s pensions or anything like that so it was all hard work.  
MM:	How old was your sister when your father died?
AD:	She would have been three.
MM:	So she had three children under four?
AD:	Yes, she was three, I was two, and my brother was born three weeks after my father died.  Well, that was where we grew up in Belfast and when I started work, I started a very interesting job.  I loved it, making chocolates.  I started with a small firm, first of all, Thompsons of Belfast, but I moved from there to the Ormeau Bakery in 1939, the war years, you know and I was there from thirty nine to fifty three, when I got married and went to Canada.  And then we stayed in Canada for four years, which I loved.  We’d good jobs, everything went well, but I couldn’t stand the humidity and the heat in the summer time so we came back.  However, my time in the Ormeau Baker I would say were amongst the happiest years; they were all happy.  They were very special years.  I think it was because it was wartime.
MM:	How old were you when you started work?
AD:	I was twenty-six when I went into the Ormeau Bakery and I was forty when we left to go to Canada.  And you see I wasn’t married until I was forty.
MM:	Sensible woman, you waited.  [Both laugh]
AD:	Well, in the war years you know, nobody could get married because there were coupons, and everything was rationed, and jobs were queer, people were having to go and work in ammunition places.  I was one of the fortunate people who had a nice job and a job that I wasn’t very willing to give up to go to Canada.  But then, I wanted to go and the time was right.  So once the war was over, you see, and a few years over, things got on and got back to normal.  But the war years in the Ormeau Bakery were very very interesting years indeed, because it was food, you see.  I mean my speciality was making chocolates, which of course involved the parcels for troops and all that kind of thing, because all the sales went through the bread servers.  So they would place orders with me for em, oh maybe several dozen half pound boxes of peppermint creams.  These were all going into different packages for soldiers, you know people sending them, but the bakery itself, the bakery supplied the bread when ships came in, but it was all very hush hush, you see.  The names of the ships were never known and of course, the bread had to be ready and special deliveries, and everything was taken.  So that was one of the things that the Ormeau Bakery did.
MM:	How would they have managed, with rationing, to produce things like sweets?
AD:	Well, sweets weren’t, it was a fondant type of thing, you know, and chocolate wasn’t rationed.  You see those things weren’t rationed – that came in, what I’m talking about, I’m not talking about bars I’m talking about blocks of chocolate, the big fifty six pound blocks.  But to get back to the rationing, once dried eggs and margarine came on the scene all that stopped in the Ormeau Bakery.  They had very high standards and they wouldn’t bake anything unless the ingredients were completely pure, wholesome, and fresh.  You know, fresh eggs, pure better, everything.  So all cakes, all fancy shortbreads and all that sort of thing, they were put off immediately and I mean, soda bread, wheaten bread all that, all kinds of bread were still baked but because there was no fresh eggs or margarine involved.  They were stopped immediately and that meant a lot of people in the fancy cake departments, it meant they were jobless but Ormeau Bakery had very high standards and they chose their staff very carefully too.  So when that happened they didn’t pay anyone off, they spread the staff over the different departments, of which I received two into the chocolate department, you know.  So that was all part of the war there.  Another thing which it was involved very much in [pause] I’m not quite sure but I think it was the Enniskillen Fusiliers, the Ormeau Bakery, we did all the knitting for them.  The bakery, the owners of the bakery, it was privately owned I should say, the Ormeau Baker – the Wilson family – and they had, as I say, very high standards.  You were almost into heaven with the reference you’d need to get into the Ormeau Bakery, you know, but they [pause] I was going to say something else about it but I went off my story, they spread the staff, they didn’t pay anyone off, they spread staff right round the whole place and that meant that no one was ever out of work.  But standards became higher and higher because in Ormeau Bakery, you couldn’t start work any day without first having a shower.
MM:	That was unusual?
AD:	Yes, without having a shower and woe betide you if you didn’t and you were told on, you know.  You were as good as gone.  Their standards were absolutely terrific.  So that was the type of place I worked in all during the war and anything that could be done was done to help the troops and that, you know.  Different things - you see it was the blackout years as well and very often in the work that I was doing, I had to leave.  In the summer time for instance, it was difficult to temper chocolate in the middle of the day if it was very hot, so I would be away on my back at six o’clock in the morning, you see.  I would only work until two if I started at six, but em, that was blackout.  Well, six o’clock in the morning in the summer wasn’t blackout but for me to be alone on a bicycle leaving home at half past five, the police would stop me and want to know where I was going and what I was doing?
MM:	Did you have far to go?
AD:	Yes, I lived on the Donegall Road, that was another thing [pause] right up opposite it was Maguire and Paterson’s Match Factory, a big big building, just opposite to it on the other side, which meant that as soon as the sirens went we had to get out immediately because if an incendiary had hit the match factory, well it would have blown the Donegall Road to kingdom come.  I mean it’s full of sulphur for making [pause] so as soon as the sirens went we were out.  I don’t know if you know the Donegall Road, you do?  Well we lived right up at the top at Celtic Park, at the front of the road and as soon as we got out, we had to walk on up, up the White Rock Road and on the up the Black Mountain and we used to watch the bombs falling on the city the night of the big blitz, up on the mountains and they were praying all around us, you know.  It was just one of those [pause].
MM:	Did you always go up to the mountains - you didn’t go into shelters?
AD:	No, we didn’t go into shelters; we always went up.  There was no shelters; really.  If there was any danger and you thought there might be something and you didn’t have to go out [pause] everybody had something.  We had a place underneath the stairs, for instance, everybody had something; but with the match factory being so close, we had to get out, so we had.  And actually, you were nearly safer up the mountains than in a shelter because if a shelter got hit; so that was another side to it and coming up if you’d worked late, which I very often had to [pause].  Different things cropped up when the war was on; things had to be done in a hurry, you know, maybe a ship coming in or something like that.  So we you couldn’t walk in the blackout then, alone, you had to be in twos and threes because again, everything was pitch.  You were allowed a flashlamp but you could only switch that to the ground because any light at all, you see, if there was anything overhead.  So it was pretty weird but there was a lot of fun during the war as well because there was canteens set up in different hotels and different places and different church halls for the troops, which meant a party and a dance and a date, possibly.  [Laughs]  More often than not.  So, as I say, there was the good times, you know, and it was all done to try and make a bit more liveable for the fellows who were so far away from home.
MM:	Were these British or American troops?
AD:	Both, yes, we had quite a bit and it was all - the airforce, the navy and the army, the whole lot.  Oh yes, we had the lot, so we had.  
MM:	Can we just go back a little bit [pause] how old were you when you left school?
AD:	I was only fourteen when I left school.
MM:	And you went into the chocolate factory then?  Did they train you?
AD:	There were older people there who were doing it and they trained me and I was apparently pretty quick on the uptake and I think I was about sixteen and I was put into different [pause] I’m not talking about the Ormeau Bakery now, I’m talking about the first place I went, Thompsons.  They put me into the different - they’d beautiful big places in Belfast, one in Donegall Place, a big one in the Antrim Road and one on Anne Street and these different shop windows.  I was sitting fork dipping chocolates, white cap, white coat, and everything.  I was quite young and dare I add it, easy to look at [both laugh] and I was put in the window, apparently for that reason.  And I remember on one occasion having to come out of the window in Anne Street because the pavement was so crowded the people weren’t getting by on a Saturday night.  So I had done all that before I went to the Ormeau Baker so when I went to the Ormeau Baker I was fully conversant.  They did things a little bit differently but I knew how.  I was very fortunate there because the gentleman who was the - what would you call him?  Well, he was the boss of the whole show and he made the wedding cakes and everything and he did that kind of work in the chocolate room on lovely steel-topped tables.  He got promotion and of course, was taken out, and I was very fortunate to have been given then the complete charge of the chocolate room.  So I usually had maybe six to eight girls, usually you know, and they’d be there and we were all a very happy bunch.
MM:	What way was the workforce structured?  Were there mainly women in the workforce?
AD:	Do you mean in the entire [pause] ?
MM:	Yes, well where you were working?
AD:	Well the chocolate room was women but the Ormeau Bakery had hundreds of people.  I mean, there was hotplate workers, the fancy cake people, the wedding cake men, the travelling biscuit machines, everything was automatic, even the chocolate digestive biscuits were done in the chocolate room.  I had to work to get the chocolate ready and we fed the biscuits in and they’d pass through you know all the chocolate and then were turned at the other end, you know.  Oh yes, and then there was the flour loft where all the flour was prepared and there used to be men up there.
MM:	Was there any division in the sense that - a lot of the women who have spoken to me, in a lot of factories the women did the less skilled work and men got into the better jobs.  That doesn’t sound like it was the case for you?
AD:	No, it wasn’t like that at all.  In the Ormeau Baker, women’s work was women’s work and men’s and there was no mixing because the standards were very high because they didn’t only train you specifically in your job.  Discipline was very strong and manners were everything.  I mean when we met our lady superintendent in any department, if I had’ve said “Good morning” she’d have turned to me and said, “My name is Miss Grahame”.  You see, we had to say “Good morning, Miss Grahame” and this for me anyway, I thought was a wonderful way to grow up.
MM:	Did you get a corresponding courtesy from the management?  Would they say “Good morning, Miss S.”?
AD:	Yes, they called me “Alice”, they didn’t say “Miss S.”, but they were absolutely - they treated the staff wonderfully, so they did.  If you had a day when you were not feeling very good, you just had to go to Miss Grahame and we had what we called an ambulance room and you got a lie down, you got a couple of aspirins and a cup of tea and maybe within the hour you were back at your job, you know.  Oh yes, it was such a wonderful place to work, I couldn’t speak highly enough of it.  It was a family called Wilson, from Derramore Drive on the Ormeau Road.  There’s still two – Mr. Ian was the son and Mr. Elliott – they’re there still.  Now they’re not in the business because after the older people passed on it passed on to these two, I think it’s all part of the Ranks Organisation now, something like that and of course, it’s not the same lovely place it was.  Oh no, they were a marvellous [pause] it was such a wonderful place to work and as I say, even in my own kitchen yet, if I do something, I’d say to myself well it’s well Miss Grahame’s not watching.  We used to serve in the shop on a Saturday morning, to help out, and in those days bread wasn’t wrapped.  You know you had these sheets of paper, you know, when you covered them up and I can remember one Saturday morning, one girl, she couldn’t get the paper to separate, you know that sort of paper, she did that [licked her finger] and she was taken off the counter immediately and she was asked how would you like to buy bread with paper that someone had licked?  You know, it was a wonderful place for me, I would add at this stage, I was a girl guide all my life, and I always say that the Guides and the Ormeau Bakery made me what I am.  I know we all need the three Rs when we leave school, which I had no problem with, but the things that really matter - that’s where I got them.
MM:	And would they have paid well as well?  Were the conditions good?
AD:	Yes; that was why I changed from Thompsons.  I immediately had [pause] it wasn’t a lot of money now but in those days to get 10s. a week more than where you were leaving was a lot of money, especially during the war years.  And then as I told you when the gentleman who got his promotion was moved out from the chocolate room and I got the job, well my wages went up and I had sort of managerial standing.  You can see I’m sitting beside a silver tea service that I got for a wedding present when I left, and that - you always got a gift from the works, you know they always gave [pause] which I did, I got a canteen of cutlery but no one up to that stage had ever got from the management, which I did, so that was really something, you know.  Oh, it was a wonderful place to work.
MM:	And did you leave when you got married because you had to leave or because you were going to Canada?
AD:	Because I was going to Canada, yes.
MM:	Was your husband Canadian?
AD:	No, no, my husband was an accountant but I had cousins in Canada and we had waited so long here with the war and one thing or another, and we’d always wanted to go.  So we said we’d get married and go.  So we went the day we got married, had our honeymoon on the liner.  [Laughs]  Moonlight on the Atlantic and sunset on the St. Laurence, I used to say.  [Both laugh]
MM:	Just to go back again, I’m interested in - you left school at fourteen, was that because money was so tight?
AD:	Well that was the school leaving age then.  You see, there wasn’t the opportunities then there are now.  I mean when I was leaving school the president of our public elementary school came to my mother and said that they would pay half the fees if she could raise the half to allow me to go on to be a teacher.  And my mother said I’m waiting for her to go to work – that’s just what it was.  There was no choice in the matter; I mean it wasn’t a case of doing your GCSCs and getting into university and everything.  I mean we had the potential, I think I would say our potential was far higher in those days than they are now but the opportunities weren’t there.  I had gone through right through to the seventh standard and I was still only thirteen and very often when the school-teacher in the lower grade, they talk about P1 and P2 now, you know, would be out sick, I would be sent down to take the class, you know.  So the opportunities just [pause] as I say, my mother was a widow, she was waiting for me to go to work.
MM:	And did your mother work outside the home while you were at school?
AD:	Yes, every day.
MM:	So she had three small children and had to go out anyway?
AD:	Yes that’s right, she had to go out and work.  She used to say that was her proudest boast (looking at her hands) That’s what I raised you with.  She was a widow when she was twenty-three and her first widow’s pension she was fifty-five, which was 10s a week.  She thought she’d got a fortune.
MM:	And what sort of jobs did she do?
AD:	She worked in the Ulster Spinning Company in the dining room, she did the meals for the staff and she also did the offices – all the office work, you know the cleaning of the offices.
MM:	So when you went into work in the chocolate factory, what sort of hours were you working?
AD:	What kind of hours?  I worked from eight o’clock, then we had a half past twelve to half past one for lunch and then half past one to five o’clock.
MM:	And did you work on Saturdays?
AD:	Saturdays to lunchtime, yes.
MM:	So when you got home from work in the evening, then, would you help out your mother with housework?
AD:	Oh yes, the note was on the table what you had to do.  Tell Alice [pause] maybe you had to go shopping, go for butter - that was another thing, you see, during the war you got two ounces of butter per person, which was a half a pound to our house, there was four of us.  Well my mother just could not stomach margarine so we let her have the half-pound of butter and we used to mix the cream of the tops of the milk with the margarine.  You did all those things during the war, you made butter that way, you know.
MM:	And did your sister go into a good trade as well?
AD:	My sister was in the Ormeau Bakery shop for quite a while but previous to that, she had been in a clothing [pause] yes, she was stitching in the Albion Clothing Company so she was then.  She came out of it and she went to the Ormeau Bakery shop.  She spent about five years there and then she went into Anderson and Macauley’s the big fashion store on Donegall Place, where she spent the rest of her working days.
MM:	And what about your brother, did he have to leave school early too?
AD:	Sadly my brother died last year.  But he left school at fourteen, yes.  He didn’t like school; he left at lunchtime on the day he was fourteen.
MM:	And did he get a chance to get into a trade or do an apprenticeship?
AD:	Yes, Frank went as a painter for quite a while and then he went into Fords, the motor place, so he did, yes.  That was our family.  My mother died in 1963, she was only seventy-two.
MM:	And were you still living with your mother when you got married?
AD:	Yes.  Well, in those days people didn’t go out and get places on their own.  Everybody stayed at home.
MM:	And what sort of house did you have?
AD:	We had a terraced house, with three bedrooms and a big attic, you know.  We had two rooms and what you called the parlour in those days.  The parlour and living room.
MM:	And would your mother have had any kind of household gadgets, a washing machine, or anything like that?
AD:	We had a mangle and I had to turn it while she put the clothes through.  Thursday was ironing night and I had that to do.  We had pulley lines, you know, for the clothes.  Oh no, as I say, they don’t know anything about hard work now, so they don’t.  My mother had a really hard life but we all had to help, our jobs were all laid out for us.  She had to go back to do an office always on a Monday night.  She washed on Tuesday nights, so Thursday night was ironing night, and that was my job.  I had the ironing to do, even when I would be eighteen, nineteen and maybe I used to say to my mother I’ve got a date and she’d say that’s all right, after you get the ironing done.
MM:	So when you started getting paid at work, did you bring home your pay packet?
AD:	Oh yes, we had to bring home; we had to hand in our pay.  We got so much back, you know, but it was never [pause] there was no stress about it or difficulty.  We were glad we had got to the stage where we were working and of course, in those days, you could buy material and somebody could make you something to wear.  It wasn’t like, everything was so cheap.  It was cheap but then wages were tiny, they were just a fraction of what you get.  I used to say to my mother If I save up, mother, and buy the flowered voile, will you pay for the making of it?  That was the sort of thing; you used to get round it this way.  But I’d have taken a child out, you know, and wheeled it for a day and minded it for somebody.  Maybe I’d have got [pause] I was going to say fifty pence but it wasn’t fifty pence in those days, you’d maybe get two shillings or something like that.
MM:	This was while you were still at school?
AD:	Oh yes.
MM:	And in either Thompsons or the Ormeau Bakery, as well as the pay, did you get extra benefits like pension schemes or sick pay schemes?
AD:	Well, we didn’t have [pause] they do have now what we called a Trust Fund.  Say I allowed two shillings to be deducted from my pay every week, the firm put two shillings to it, and we got - when you would retire you got a lump sum.  When I left, like, after fifteen years my lump sum was £50 you know.  Well, under the circumstances in our house, I had to put that on a book for my mother to keep her until I would get work in Canada, so that’s where that went.  Then we got jobs.  We went to Canada and we were all working.  When I say all, my husband’s nephew, he had gone too and as I say, we got through the first year but in that time, early fifties, a lot of people were going and we always say you’d have thought Canada was waiting for us.  You know, everything just turned out so good, you know and then once I got earning, I was able to send my mother money.
MM:	I take it you had no difficulty getting emigration papers or anything?
AD:	None whatsoever.  I had wonderful references from the Ormeau Bakery, you know.  Not that that really counted in Canada.  You get everything on your merits there, which I think is a far better way.  Of course, it’s not a welfare state, you see and that, in my estimation, makes better citizens.
MM:	Right, although I would feel that a welfare state, if there had been welfare before the war at least your mother wouldn’t have had to work so hard.  You know, there are people who should be looked after.
AD:	That’s right, but in Canada the dollar is the mighty thing and they go after the dollar.  There’s no sentiment, I mean, working in the Ormeau Bakery, I speak with love of the Ormeau Bakery and I never cried leaving home because if we figured well, if we don’t like Canada we can come back.  But I cried leaving the Ormeau Bakery.  I just thought what am I doing, you know.  I could have gone back into it.
MM:	Would you not have gone back?
AD:	I could, but I probably would have been subordinate to some of the people I had trained and that didn’t appeal to me at all.  So, my husband went back to the firm that he had left, they were glad to get him back.  He was in Downpatrick, Stewart’s Motor Works – it was a big motor works place – so I fortunately got into the County Council and that was in Downpatrick so we were able to come and go together.
MM:	Was that clerical work?
AD:	Oh yes, it was clerical work there.  Well, with having been in charge of the chocolate room, you see, I had to be responsible for books, for time, for the time keeping you know.  You see, apart from making lovely things, you had to polish shapes, pretty flower shapes and all, if you were get the result you wanted the shapes all had to be perfect.  For Easter eggs, when you were doing those, you know, so there was a certain of time, you know, when I would say we have to cleaning this morning and I would have to fill in all the time for all of the different jobs.  As well as that, if I went to the general store and ordered say twenty-eight pounds of chocolate and maybe fourteen pounds of fondant, that would be forty-two pounds of ingredients, while I might have been allowed about two pounds of a loss.  Like, I would have to produce forty pounds of the finished article so I had stock control as well, so that going in and sitting down at a desk was no problem whatsoever.
MM:	How did that arise, as you were moving upwards in the job, were you learning on the job or were you given training as you went along?
AD:	We were given training, yes.
MM:	For yourself, before you took over as manager of that area were you trained?
AD:	No, when I went into the Ormeau Bakery I was - apart from the gentleman who was the boss, I would have been ahead of any of the girls from an experience standpoint and then the work that I had demonstrated in all the windows and the other places I was telling you about, and then I had worked with Mr. McHendry for a couple of years, you see, before he got his promotion.  There was no question of who would take over, apparently.
MM:	And did people tend to stay in the Ormeau Bakery a long time?
AD:	Once you got into the Ormeau Bakery - getting in was the thing.  Getting in [pause].
MM:	So it wasn’t like a lot of factories where neighbourhood people would introduce their family and friends to get in?
AD:	No, that’s another thing they did not do, employ family people.  There wasn’t two out of one family.  My sister worked in the shop but the shop was not the bakery and she was only there for a few years and it was during the war, because they were being paid off where she was working and she got into the shop.  But if it hadn’t been the shop, they wouldn’t have put her in the bakery with me already being there.
MM:	Why was that?
AD:	I don’t know but there was never two or three or one family ever in.
MM:	Well, you obviously considered them to be good employers but were there trade unions in the bakery?
AD:	Oh yes.
MM:	Were you ever active yourself?
AD:	Well, we had to pay whatever, there was always a certain of payment you know for trade union membership but oh yes, it was all very much above board, indeed very much.  Everything was right about the Ormeau Bakery; I just felt, no matter where I ever worked after that, I was always looking back.  Many’s the time I used to say, dear me, you wouldn’t get them doing that in the Ormeau Bakery.  I used to have to shut up at times.
MM:	I wouldn’t say it made you very popular.  [Both laugh]
AD:	Oh yes, it was a wonderful place to work and the owner himself was a lovely gentleman, thoughtful and interested in the people.
MM:	Even with such a large workforce would he have known all the people individually?
AD:	He may not have known then just by name but when he would come round, many’s the time we used to say Mr. Wilson’s on the flat, he’s coming along by the hot plate.  You know, you’d be checking your hair, because you had to wear caps, no hair out, anything like that.  When it came to the end of the day, when you’d been working hard all day, you started off from your shower with hair and everything tucked in nicely – you know at the at end of the day and maybe it was coming out a bit.  Miss Grahame, I can remember on one occasion Miss Grahame coming in and she did look along the whole table and she admired the work and all and gave us due credit.  And she turned to Constance, she had beautiful hair this girl and she’d awful trouble keeping it in her cap, and she just did that [pointed to her head] and said to Constance come with me.  So Constance was taken into the cloakroom and told to take her cap off and put her hair back up and get it all back in.  So when she came down, she looked at the rest of them and she said I think you all need your hair tidied and she was so diplomatic, when she came to me, she said and Alice, I want you to be the example.  Talk about diplomacy – she was wonderful, they were marvellous people to work for.
MM:	The showers were in the premises?
AD:	Oh yes.
MM:	And literally everyone who went in had to have a shower?  
AD:	Yes.  Even the cleaners – we all had different colour uniforms, we all had lockers and towels were provided.  Every Monday morning you picked up your own laundry.
MM:	And was the shower during working hours or would you have to get in early?
AD:	I started work at eight and I had to be in and be showered and punch the clock so that I was ready.  And if you didn’t punch for maybe a couple of minutes after eight there’d be a red mark on your card and if it went to five past, there’d be another one and if it went any further than that, you were called in.
MM:	And would money be deducted then from your ages at the end of the week?
AD:	No, I’ve never known that to occur.  Just you’d be told that you - that the starting time was eight but if everybody had to wait for somebody else to punch - well, you might be waiting for somebody to punch the clock on time but somebody else was punching, you know to get in.  But the discipline was very, very high but you had to learn to live with it.  And I found the better you did that, the happier you were in the job and you got a better standing, in your wages and everything.  And I used to help with boiling the jam; this was for the department like.  I’m talking about fifty-six pounds of raspberries, like, and fifty-six pounds of sugar…
MM:	Was this for cake fillings and that?
AD:	Yes, it would be used you know for filling.  Well, this would be in a big copper thing with a big, big spout.  Well, you volunteered, you know, because it would be after hours and maybe in the summer time, you know it was a very warm job type of thing.  But I remember when I got my pay one Friday and I remember I said I’m overpaid and I went back to the accounts and I said look, it was ten shillings or something which in those days was a lot of money.  I said there’s an error in my pay packet, there’s extra money in it and they said oh well, I was given that instruction, you’d better talk to Miss Grahame.  Which I did, and she said that I had more than earned it.  You know, you got it that way.
MM:	That wasn’t formal overtime?  It was a kind of a bonus?
AD:	Oh no, it wasn’t formal overtime; it was because of the work you had done.  They showed their appreciation of it.  That’s why I say, I mean, the discipline and manners and everything and a proper way of speaking were very important too, you know, because she was very strict you know, but she just would have stopped you and said no, you say it this way.  That would have happened maybe to younger people more often, you know young newer people when they were growing up in it.  But even your first interview, really and truly I can remember as if it was yesterday, you’d have thought you were trying to get into heaven instead of the Ormeau Bakery.  [Laughs]
MM:	How many people interviewed you?
AD:	Oh, just Miss Grahame.  She was a maiden lady, very very highly educated woman.  She just demanded the very best, the very highest of everybody and she got it, she got it.  Many was the time behind her back we laughed and we’d say here’s Miss Grahame.  I have friends still and when we get together that’s what we talk about, and if you say something, I’d say you didn’t say thank you or you should have said please the way she used to say to us you know.
MM:	Would you know anything about Miss Grahame’s background?  How she came to be working there?
AD:	I didn’t know anything about her background as a young person but she lived in Balmoral Avenue that was up at the top of the Malone Road.  She was a maiden lady and lived with her maiden sister and she was [pause] where was she educated now - but she was a very highly educated lady and she educated everybody she came in contact with too, you know.  But she did [pause] when I came back from Canada the first time, she entertained me in their home, which was another thing that was practically unheard of, you know.  Oh, Alice S., as I was in the Bakery you know, Alice S. was up in Miss Grahame’s.  I don’t know what it was, I always think that the years that I sat in those shop windows, you know, sixteen and of a Saturday night, shops were open to ten o’clock in those days.  And I’m sitting in the window and everybody’s looking at me, and I think that gave me a confidence that I might never have had as I got older.  Because I’ve noticed that throughout my life, I’m pretty active in church and the choice – my husband was organist and choir master – that if I’ve ever been asked to do anything, for instance read or talk, it doesn’t bother me.  I often think it was that, it got me over a hurdle of being afraid to face people.
MM:	It was quite a big thing for a sixteen-year-old to be put on public view like that?
AD:	Yes, wasn’t it?
MM:	Were you given a choice?
AD:	No, I was told that I was going to have to do it and that it was because I was the right person.  There was a lot of compliments, you know, when they were choosing me for this reason, for various reasons, how I looked and the way I worked and I was capable of it.  No there wasn’t anyone else, like.
MM:	Was it just one shop where they did this?
AD:	Oh no, it was different weekends I would be sometimes in Cornmarket, sometimes Anne Street, very often Donegall Place and they had a lovely big one on the Antrim Road and I was there once or twice.  I was always enjoying it, it never was a chore to me, you know.  I think if you’re good at something, it makes all the difference.  If you’re struggling, it’s different, so it is.
MM:	Well, it wouldn’t have been much of an advertisement if you were making a mess of it in the window?  [Both laugh]  But that must have created more pressure?
AD:	Yes.  I did need a lot of patience when I was training younger people, but we always had a [pause] the chocolate room had a nice atmosphere and we were always just like family.
MM:	In terms of that, did you socialise much with the people that you worked with?  You say you have friends now who worked with you back then?
AD:	Not a lot of them but one of the girls, she was a fancy cake baker and whenever they were paid off, when their work all went off when the fresh eggs and all [pause] dried eggs, they wouldn’t even entertain the thought of margarine or dried eggs coming into the Ormeau Baker [pause] so this was one of the girls, she asked could she get down to work with Alice in the chocolate room.  So that was considered, and she got down and actually, the man she married was the gentleman I was telling you about who was the boss of the chocolate room, that when he moved out I got the promotion.  So she and her husband when they were sort of boy and girl going together, my husband and I were the same, and we had a foursome many is the time.  Her husband is dead as mine is too and she and I are still good friends.
MM:	And was there an organised social life?  Was there a sports club for instance?
AD:	There wasn’t a sports club but we had a table tennis table in the canteen, which I was on every minute I could get, you know.  And even Mr. Wilson, he used to watch us in his lunch hour, you know, on the table tennis table.  We did have a choir, of which I was a part also, and we did enjoy that a lot and every year what they called the Trust meeting, you know business were discussed and all that and the choir would perform, you know, after tea.  It was a lot of fun, you know, but work came first in the Ormeau Bakery, it came first.  And there was no half measures and no short cuts, everything had to be done to Ormeau Bakery standards.  But having said that, that’s what made it all so worthwhile and so good to be part of.  But there was a lot of fun and they were all lovely people because they chose their staff very carefully, so they did.
MM:	And were there ever people who didn’t reach the standards, who might have been let go for some reason?
AD:	There would have been; there would have been.  If people didn’t [pause] if for instance, people didn’t shower and they were found out, in anything unseemly of any kind, they would be let go.  But I think a part that was very good too because the wool used to come in, you know all this dark green wool and so many of us, you know we’d take lots of it home and we’d knit around the table tennis table.  You know the table tennis had to stop because you had tea, and you know you were eating and you were knitting because they wanted a dozen pairs of socks and so many pullovers and balaclava helmets, you know all that and we used to bring it home too.  My mother used to knit and my sister and all.  I remember one weekend they needed [pause] we were one pullover short and I brought the wool home and my sister knit the back and my mother knit the front with the vee neck and I knit the two sleeves, in a weekend.  We got it all together you know to get the parcel ready for the troops, so we did.  There was lots of things like that.  There was a lot of fun during the war, as well as a lot of sorrow, because there was so many nice young fellows in the Bakery went into the services and some of them didn’t come back, sadly, you know.
MM:	Would there have been more women than usual working there, because of that sort of thing – men going off to the services?
AD:	No, I wouldn’t have thought - no, women would never have put into a position that a man had vacated.
MM:	Even on a temporary basis?
AD:	Well, maybe on a temporary basis.  Very often, I would get my own stock up, for instance we moulded a lot of the little Daddy Christmases and that sort of thing, you know you’d moulds and everything for Easter Eggs and everything.  And I used to get that all up in good time for Christmas and then we would be available to go out and help in the pastry room or at the [pause] we used to call it ‘catching’ at the hot plate, you know so it was caught coming off.  You were always available, because naturally at Christmas there was extra everything needed, you know.  So you could have moved around and the more you made yourself available to the various departments, well then, the more popular you’d be, the more you were appreciated, the more use you were too.  
MM:	When you were having contact with the troops, in the canteens or wherever, I take it you tried not to talk about the war?
AD:	We did, because it was always a fun thing, you know, more a fun thing.  Many was the time you’d have taken an address and written to them.
MM:	Were the dances organised?
AD:	The dances, well the dances – now I’m not talking about the Ormeau Bakery and I’m talking about other dances.  No, well I had a friend who was - she was in the army and she was in the Holywood Barracks, on the Holywood Road and she was a sergeant.  She happened to be one woman who had plenty of men [laughs] sort of under her thumb.  But she lived along with her dad, he was a widower and very often she would have brought some of the boys up to her home and I would have been there to help.  Some of them were married men, they brought us and showed us pictures [pause] young married men, there were first babies and they were left home and left, you know and they used to really a enjoy a night in a home, you know out of the barracks and that.  And it was with her, and her company, we would go to the dances in the barracks, you see, and very often there would be other ones organised in the vicinity and we would all go, you know.  But you know you were dating and seeing them, and you were allowed to bring them home because it was the war.  People used to say about my mother that they never knew how she did it but she was always able to put something on the table, even with all the rationing.  Boiled egg, toast, type of thing, you know.  [Laughs]
MM:	Would that, your whole area would have welcomed the troops in that way?
AD:	Oh yes, during the war people would have done that.  And we danced a lot; they were all lovely dancers.  The only thing about is was there was no cars; there was no petrol, even for people who had a car and it was bicycles and if you hadn’t a bicycle, well you were walking.  And one of the boys of the Holywood Barracks, he was a lovely musician and a beautiful singer, one of these gorgeous big piano accordions, you know and I had them all up to mother’s, to our house, one night.  Actually, it was Easter Tuesday night, it was the night of the big blitz and everybody had gone for the early bus but Derek and he just got up to go and we just got out to the door and the sirens went.  I said, you can’t go, with a piano accordion, you know the size of that, I said, you can’t go.  Oh, he says, I have to go because if he hadn’t gone he would have been what do they call it? AWOL – absent without leave.  So he had to go and he walked from the top of Donegall Road to the Holywood Road, with the blackout and all, through that blitz that night.  He said the times he ran into air raid shelters, whenever there was one, and then to another but he had to go, otherwise he’d have been in trouble.
MM:	Even in special circumstances, like a bombing raid?
AD:	That’s right, if you had to be back in the barracks, because they never knew what they would be called out to do, you see.
MM:	Would they have been involved in, you know, trying to help people in the ruins of houses?
AD:	Yes, they would.  That’s what they would do when they were there in that particular barracks.  But we did a lot for them, we gave them a lot of fun and a lot of meals in houses, you know that helped - for them to get anything home-baked, for instance a home-made apple tart.  Oh dear, you know they’d get tired of barracks diet, you know whatever it might be, I suppose potatoes and such.  And where Dorry lived, you know the gentleman next door to her was a baker in Inglis’s Bakery, and as soon as we’d say the boys were coming, he would have baked a big apple tart you know, I mean a big one, you know.  [Laughs]  So things like that, we did but the war - as I say nobody wants a war but there was a great lot of fun.  There was a great side to it, you know.  I suppose I can talk like this because I didn’t lose anybody close to me in it, but I mean, to set it beside what we’re going through at the present time, for the past thirty years, give me a war.
MM:	Well, I suppose the issues were much more clear-cut?
AD:	Yes, they know what they’re fighting for, where they’re fighting and all about it but apart from sirens you weren’t afraid to go to bed at night, you know what I mean.  You just had to hop up and get out and that was it.
MM:	What about feeling about the South being neutral?  Was there resentment?
AD:	Oh well, I was very happy about it, because we couldn’t get out of Ireland for holidays, you see.  I never would have known the South or saw all the beauty of it if it hadn’t been that we could go there.  My husband and I, we cycled the whole of County Wicklow during the war.  We took the bikes of course on the train, then you see to Dublin.  And there were a lot of Dublin fellows, you see, came up to work in the aircraft factories and all here.  And there was one - that friend of mine who as I said was a sergeant, a man from Dublin was living with her daddy, just from Monday to Friday like, he went home to Dublin at the weekends.  But his wife had a nice boarding house in Bray, so that’s where we went for our holidays and we left every morning early and we would cycle so much of Wicklow.  Sometimes we stayed over and sometimes we came back and I wouldn’t have missed those holidays for anything.  And we went to Dun Laoghaire every Easter, we used to stay at the Royal Hotel, is that it?  It used to be.  [Laughs]  So we saw a lot of - kissed the Blarney Stone and all those things we’d never have been able to do.
MM:	A lot of the women I’ve spoken to said they got round the rationing by going South to pick up things.  Smuggling was a great game for a lot of people.
AD:	I never was without silk stockings, so I wasn’t.  [Laughs]  Fashion was always very strong with me and I just couldn’t bear the thought of not having fully-fashioned stockings, you know with the back seams and all the rest of it.  I used to tie them in my husband’s braces here in the shoulders and let them hang down the back of his coat.  [Both laugh]  And I bought a lovely fur coat in Clerys and it was all those years ago - I’d have been put in gaol.  The wife of the gentleman who stayed up with Dorry’s dad, she wore it up for me.  Like she lived in Dublin, you see, and it was an Indian lamb coat I bought and she wore it and I bought a hat to match it and shoes.  And I can remember going down to the Great Northern Railway to meet Rose, and here she was coming walking along in all my finery, you know.  [Both laugh]  So I did it too, believe you me, I never was without my silk stockings.  People were putting colour on their legs and everything but I didn’t need to, I always had my stockings.  Oh yes, and lovely handbags and everything and shoes.  I used to go away like some pauper with the oldest sandals maybe I had and I used to throw them in the Liffey and get new ones.  [Both laugh]
MM:	There were probably lots of things like that sailing down the Liffey at the time.  [Both laugh]  I read a diary that somebody wrote during the war years and they used to come from Belfast down to Dublin and remark on the lights, that it always struck them.  Because having seen the Belfast blackout when they got into Dublin, they just couldn’t get over the fact of how much the area was lit up.
AD:	We loved it too, you see.  Oh yes, we loved it, so we did.  You see we went for a fortnight every summer and then we went every Easter down to Dun Laoghaire but we always took the bikes and had a great cycle all around.  Oh yes, we loved it, so we did.  
MM:	During the Emergency, as it was in the South, censorship was very strict and a lot of Southern Irish people wouldn’t have known too much about what was going on in Europe or the rest of the world for that matter.  For you, I mean the censorship was quite strict in newspapers and cinema and everything in Britain as well, would you have been aware that there were things you weren’t being told?
AD:	With reference to the war?  I think we were fairly well acquainted with everything.  I daresay there may have been things that we didn’t know about it, but they were always coming up did you hear such and such a thing?
MM:	Would that have been from soldiers talking to people?
AD:	I couldn’t say that I ever heard the soldiers [pause] you may have heard the odd thing from them but you see they were so strictly [pause] they’d taken care of themselves.  Many was the time you’d have wanted them to stay or go someplace with you but oh boy, if we did that, we’d be in trouble.  Either that, or they wouldn’t be at a dance for another six months, they’d be grounded you see.  It was sad, because you would get to know them very well, knowing all the time that they would soon be moving.  And that boy who had the lovely piano accordion - there were three Scots fellows, the last time we saw them we had a night in Dorry’s house and they were going up to Ballinamallard, that’s in Enniskillen, but that was where they were leaving for Dunkirk and we never heard of them again.  So we don’t know if they [pause] an awful lot of people were lost crossing to Dunkirk that time so we never knew because [pause] We feel they must have been because if they had come through it all, even afterwards like when they’d have been home, we feel they’d have got in touch, so they would.  Like, they knew our mothers, it wasn’t just dates, you know what I mean, because you brought them home and I used to say to my mother I’m going to bring Derek and John and some of them in tonight.  I’ll try and get such and such a thing and I would have got something in the bakery, maybe a crusty loaf or something like that, whatever you could have got.  
MM:	Could you get your bread ration from the bakery directly or did you have to queue?
AD:	Well you didn’t have to queue but you had to have your BTUs as we called them, the coupons.  Like, we couldn’t have got it from the bakery without them.  They were very strict about that, they were.  There was no difference made because you were working, you know.  Because they were depending on the public and they couldn’t do that, you know.
MM:	Would there have been much involvement from the Ministry of Food in running the bakery?  Like having to change the recipes to suit the conditions?
AD:	I don’t think they could have done that in a privately owned place like the Ormeau Bakery because they had their own standards and they wouldn’t lower them.  They would not lower them; they put the thing off completely, you see, which was devastating at the time because people would have willingly bought them, even done with dried eggs and margarine.  But no, they wouldn’t.  As a matter of fact, just to show you show strict they were about the standards – I was waiting one time for a little chocolate cases that you put chocolates in, for a box of chocolates.  And they were finally delivered and left at the door of the bakery but they were in a big margarine carton.  You know it was just a cardboard carton that they put them all in and they wouldn’t let them in because they said how could they tell the people they were not using margarine for the people who had seen this.  And they sent the chocolate cases back and I was waiting for them but no, they returned it.  Nobody could have dictated to them really, because as I say they were a privately owned concern and the standards were unimpeachable, you know.  It was a privilege to have been part of it.
MM:	Certainly the standards of hygiene and everything seem to have been most unusual - did they have people monitoring, were there Miss Grahame’s in many departments?
AD:	Well there was only the one Miss Grahame, but as far as I was concerned I was the one to monitor the girls in the chocolate room, you see, and of course, having been monitored myself by her for so long, I knew.  Well, I would have been the one who would have taken the rap if any of my girls had of fallen short.  She would simply say, did Alice not tell you such and such a thing how that should be done?  But thankfully, I had a very high standing in it and as I say, this was the proof of it [indicating silver tea service in cabinet].  
MM:	It really is beautiful.
AD:	Usually, the staff and the management would contribute to what was being collected in the work place, you know.  But apparently when they went to one of the director people for the donation they were collecting for Alice, you see they said management are doing something for Alice and that was the first time.  And Miss Grahame, it was unheard of also, she called me to her office and she gave me a ten-pound note, which ten pounds, like you know, in 1953!  And said Alice, I want you to buy something for your breakfast table so that you can give me a daily thought.  Wasn’t that lovely?  And I still have bits and pieces of a breakfast set that I bought.
MM:	You were obviously highly thought of.
AD:	Yes.
MM:	You mentioned that there was an ambulance room if somebody became ill.  Would there have been a doctor and a nurse or medical staff there?
AD:	There was a doctor, not on the premises but just in the next block.  Dr. Young, he was the bakery doctor and another [pause] I’ve put it down here [checking notes] what did I say about the doctor?  This is not about the bakery actually but one night coming back over the Albert Bridge on the bicycle, you know there were tramlines in those days.  Well a land mine had fallen on Cromac Square; do you know Cromac Square?  It’s a square and a landmine had fallen in a massive hole and I’m coming on a rover bike, you know with the dropped handlebars.  My mother used to say could you not have got a bicycle where you could sit up and look where you’re going?  [Both laugh]  But I had this racing type bike coming over and the front wheel, the narrow wheels you see, went in to a tram line, into the dent the tram line made and I shot over into the hole the landmine made in Cromac Square.  And the army you see, they were all there, and so a few of the soldiers got in the hole and got me out.  And I didn’t even know where the bike was - but I could see the soldiers with the bike between their knees taking the buckle out of the wheel and everything.  And I always say, if they hadn’t of put me back on that bicycle that night, I don’t suppose I ever would have rode a bicycle again.  But I had no option, you know and the funny thing about it was when I came home – you see it was double summer time and it would clear till nearly twelve o’clock at night in summer time you see.
MM:	You didn’t have the daylight saving time then?
AD:	No they didn’t change the clock, you see.  My mother was standing at the door, quite dismayed looking, when she finally saw me arriving and I had gone on from work you see.  It was a cycle run and she said if you had come home for your tea tonight, Alice, you would not have gone out on that bike for I had dreamed the whole night that something had happened to you.  Well that was when I burst out crying for the first time.  I couldn’t cry in front of the soldiers and all the rest was shock and then, I had it all in my hinchbone was all skinned and everything.  My face here was black, you know, you should have seen me.  And I was just doctored in the house and made nice and comfortable.  Put to bed when the sirens went.  I was so ill after the fall that the fellows, the air raid wardens said I would have to get out, but when my mother explained he said, well, if you’re staying, you’re doing it at your own risk.  We were supposed to get out, well, we knew that, but I could go nowhere that night.  But we stayed anyway and just hoped for the best.  I was so scared I wouldn’t get out on the bike again I got up and went to work the next morning.  When I went in and Mr. Curson, one of the managers, came in on business into the chocolate room and he saw me.  So when I told him what had happened he sent me to the ambulance room and then Dr. Young was sent for and I was sent home.  I was concussed, he said, that was my experience of one of the landmine holes, over the handlebars of the bike, so it was.  But I was well taken care of in the bakery – it was in the middle of the week and they told me to stay off until the following Monday.
MM:  Would you have been paid while you were off?
AD:  Yes, I was paid for that, I was.  Everybody wouldn’t be, but if you were running a department like myself, you know, yes, you would be.
MM:	So when you were going, when you did feel able to be up the Black Mountain to get away from the bombing, were there many people there?
AD:	Oh yes, hundreds, hundreds of people.
MM:	Were they sleeping in the open?
AD:	Well, they weren’t sleeping really, just all standing, watching out.  They had put up sort of tents, sort of pole things with what do you call them, big tarpaulins over them, because it would be raining sometimes, you see.  And people were just all crowding in, just standing, keeping one another warm, type of thing.  And then the All Clear.  As soon as the All Clear would sound, we’d go the way back.  When you got back down it was hardly worthwhile getting into bed because the first thing you’d want was a cup of tea and then it was work time.  You’d been out half the night.
MM:	And even if there’d been a raid, was there any allowance made for people being late or anything?
AD:	Oh well, in the Ormeau Bakery they were very thoughtful and considerate.  If you had of, you know, said what had happened, they would have been understanding, they would. Yes, they would.  Oh it was a marvellous place to work, and as I say they did their part in the war effort in every way, so they did.  And any boys of the bakery who had enlisted and gone away, like they sent them food parcels and everything you know.  
MM:	Did they keep their jobs open for them after the war?
AD:	They did yes; though sadly, as I say some of them didn’t come back.  As I say, nobody wants a war but there were some happy days and happy times and you met lovely people and you made a lot of friends.
MM:	They say the experience of shared danger brings people together.
AD:	That’s right, it did that’s right it did indeed.  As I say, with the South being neutral, we just could hardly wait for summer to come, to get down, you know.  I love Co. Wicklow, I think it’s gorgeous and do you live in Dublin?
MM:	I do, but in the city.
AD:	Yes, I was down a couple of years ago, just for the day but we went out, I never hear it mentioned that’s why I put it to you.  When we used to go cycling you know, in Wicklow, to Glendalough.  We went to a place called Glenmalure.  I’m overcome, because at last I meet someone who knows what I’m talking about.
MM:	My family, we would have spent long weekends during the summers when we were young.  It was a favourite place to picnic.
AD:	It’s funny, now, Miss Grahame now that I’m talking about - when I told her that my husband, though we weren’t married then, we were going down there.  She said well, you’ll be going to Glendalough.  Well I said we’ve been in Glendalough before but she said, go to Glenmalure and she told us about a little hotel and all that was in it.  And we went, and it wasn’t as picturesque as Glendalough.  Was there some sort of mines, copper mines or something?  
MM:	Yes, there’s a quarry quite near and there’s also a firing range for the Irish army.  I don’t know if that was there then but it has been and that’s at the top of the Glen.
AD:	Well we went down with the bikes to it – we used to say we walked as much as rode but sometimes it was uphill, you know and you had to get off and push.
MM:	Unfortunately, in recent years it’s had quite a big car park put in and it spoils it.
AD:	Well, it was the war years that I was in it.  So when people say isn’t Glendalough beautiful, I say yes, but did you see Glenmalure.  I try to say it, am I right now if I’m looking at Glendalough, if I went up the mountains there on that hill at Glendalough and down the other side, I’d be into Glenmalure.
MM:	The road branches off and if you’re going to Glendalough you come to a little village called Laragh and the road to Glendalough - well it does go to the right and the road to Glenmalure goes to the left but it’s actually about two valleys on.  There’s Kelly’s Mountain and another one in between.  But I must say I’ve never cycled there – I wouldn’t be that fit.  [Both laugh]  
AD:	Well, I certainly wouldn’t now but we did then.  Oh yes, I did all my shopping too in Dublin.  Many’s the time I laugh at the shoes I threw in the Liffey.  [Both laugh]  People seeing me going out must have been thinking there she is going to Dublin without a shoe on her foot.  But I’d have a new pair on me and a new pair in the case and I’d have worn them day about the whole time I’d be there, you know, so I would.  I think that’s all the wee notes I’ve put down about the blackout, and walking in twos and threes and the bread.
MM:	This is the second interview with Mrs. Alice Douglas on Monday [pause] 
AD:	20th September.
MM:	Now really what I wanted to do was just - one very important question that I didn’t ask you, and I hope this wouldn’t be painful, but you said your father had died when your mother was very young.  What did he die of?
AD:	Typhoid, there was a typhoid epidemic apparently at the time.
MM:	And how old was he?
AD:	He was only twenty-seven or something like that.
MM:	I hadn’t heard anything about that.  Could you maybe tell me a bit more?
AD:	Well apparently there was a typhoid epidemic at the time.  My mother used to say that they suspected some kind of poisoning because he worked a lot - he was a painter and decorator and they figured it might have been lead poisoning as well but it was typhoid.  He died in the fever hospital.
MM:	And before he died, was he being treated by a doctor or was he just taken very ill very suddenly?
AD:	I don’t know a thing about that.
MM:	So your mother wasn’t inclined to talk about it – was that because it was too painful?
AD:	No, she didn’t because we were babies and as we grew older we realised that we’d no dad and she told us what happened.
MM:	One of the things that also struck me was that you were saying that your mum, she brought the three of you up by herself virtually, with no help from the state.  Would you know anything about when you were born, were you born at home or in hospital?
AD:	At home, we were all born at home.  That was the done thing then, yes.
MM:	And she never probably told you very much about that time?
AD:	No.
MM:	I’ve been reading about the Belfast City Hospital and the changes around the 1930s and 1940s and it seemed in the earlier period it wasn’t very well set up.  You never had any experience of how - you were never treated there?
AD:	No, I’m afraid I hadn’t.  The City Hospital is one of the best and biggest hospitals today, you know, in the North of Ireland.  I know it that way but I didn’t know it when I was a child.  Fortunately, we didn’t have much hospital problems, you know, none of us were ever needing the hospital as we grew up.
MM:	What about the ordinary childhood illnesses – did you experience those?
AD:	Oh yes, we did.
MM:	There was no vaccination programme presumably?
AD:	Not to my knowledge, no.  I remember my mother saying we all had it, like, one after the after type of thing, you know.
MM:	You don’t remember yourself?
AD:	No, I wouldn’t.  We were very young.  My sister doesn’t remember anything either, you know, of those years.  We remember having to go to school very young, and my mother being at work and always waiting for her coming home.
MM:	How did you manage that?  Did she leave you to school in the morning or did you just get yourselves there?
AD:	No, a neighbour’s daughter, you know, she might have been fourteen or something like that, she used to take us with her and bring us back.
MM:	So when you got home your mother was still out at work?
AD:	She was still out at work, yes.
MM:	Can you remember what time of day you’d have gotten in?
AD:	We’d have come home from school around three o’clock, between half past two and three and a neighbour just who lived beside us, she was very kind and we’d have gone into her, you know, until my mother came.
MM:	So she would give you something to eat?
AD:	Yes, she was really nursing Frank, my brother; he was the baby.  He was born three weeks after my father died.
MM:	That was another thing I wanted to ask you - when a baby was born there was there a lot of help from neighbours, particularly in a time of tragedy like your mother had.
AD:	Oh yes, there was, yes.  Then my mother brought a lady friend of hers who worked, home with her to live, you know, to give her a room in the house.  She was always there too for help.
MM:	She was a lodger?
AD:	Yes, to help pay the rent type of thing.
MM:	Was the house rented or owned?
AD:	Oh rented.
MM:	Was that from a public authority or a local landlord?
AD:	Just a local landlord in those days, yes.
MM:	You were saying in the first interview that you had three bedrooms and quite a few of the women that I’ve spoken to, that were working the most they could manage was a two-bedroomed terraced house.  So you were quite well off really [both laugh].
AD:	Yes, we had two bedrooms and then another one upstairs again, a big one, you know. 
MM:	And do you know if your parents had moved into that house when they got married?
AD:	Yes, I think that was my mother’s first dwelling, that’s right.  Because Nora was born there, my older sister.
MM:	And you all stayed there then until you got married and moved away?
AD:	No, we left that house, what age was I?  About twenty-six - it must have been the 1930s, we moved up to the top of the Donegall Road, like where we all lived together until my mother died and I was married.
MM:	And why did you move?
AD:	Well, it was a nicer - it was a nicer locality, right up on the main road.  And we didn’t have a bathroom in the first house, and we did when we went to the Donegall Road.
MM:	Was that possible because the three of you were working at that stage?
AD:	Oh yes, we were working and grown up and things were better for us.  We were all working and [pause] my mother wasn’t.  She was at home by that time.
MM:	In terms of paying the rent, would you still have given your pay packet to your mother and she’d have paid the rent out of it?
AD:	We had to pay [pause] we’d have given the money and we had so much given back to us, you know.
MM:	To go back again to your childhood, you mentioned that you had been in the Girl Guides.  Was that attached to the local church?
AD:	Well, guide companies usually are, but we just happened to be a company not attached to a church.  We met in a hall on the Donegall Road and we had a very good captain and lieutenant from a very well known school, Richmond Lodge on the Malone Road.  They had come from there and we were very blessed with gifted, two gifted girls who were musical - singers - and we entered competitions.  And then when we were [pause] you had to be eleven before you could go to camp and from when I was eleven we were camping up right until our early twenties.  Very keen on guiding all through.
MM:	Where would you have gone camping?
AD:	Locally.  We went you know to different - like for instance the demesne at Killalea and we went to a place called Eglantine; it was a country sort of big resort belonging to a wealthy man, you know and just around the coast to Ardglas at Easter time.  We would have gone there.
MM:	The two girls, you say they came from a school.  Were they still at school themselves, in secondary school, or were they teachers there?
AD:	No, they were teachers.
MM:	And this was voluntary work on their part?
AD:	Voluntary work, oh yes.  All part of the guide movement which was very strong in those days.  Still is, the guide movement still is.  My sister’s still a member of the Trefoil Guild, which is an old girl guides association.  They say once a guide always a guide [laughs].
MM:	All my siblings, my brothers and sisters – I’m the eldest of six, they were all in the sea scouts, I was the only one who wasn’t.  And they’ve never severed the connections.  But what other activities would you have done, you know when you say they were musical?
AD:	They entered us for musical competitions, you know, taught us to sing properly and taught us some lovely things.  Things I only hear people singing now and I can recall having been taught them.
MM:	Is that where your interest in choir came from?
AD:	Well it would be I suppose part of it, yes, because I was quite young then and automatically went into the church choir.
MM:	What about your mother – would she have any involvement in guide activities or anything else you were doing?
AD:	No, my mother didn’t.  She had grown up - her mother died when she was quite young.  She was left with three brothers so there was no time for organisations for her, sort of living at home and then going to work when she was the age.  So she had a pretty hard life, all told.
MM:	Was it expected by her family that she would look after her brothers?
AD:	Oh yes, she did.
MM:	What about home social activities?  I know you were saying that during the war years you had a great social life, entertaining the troops, but when you were young, did you have friends in and how would you entertain yourselves in the evenings?
AD:	In those days, you stayed young much younger than boys and girls do now.  I mean a skipping rope was my full joy until I was maybe fourteen or something, you know.  And I walked a lot and when we were with the guides you see, although it was only one night a week, we were meeting for nature study, which I loved, you know.  Going out and looking at trees, listening to the bird song.  We had to recognise them by their song, you see.
MM:	That’s something I’ve always wished I could do.
AD:	Yes, and then we would stop close up to where the song was coming from and try to spot the bird and then know if we were right, you know.  There was badges to do; I did my nature study badge because I was keen and it stayed with me right until now for I love the change of seasons and everything now, you know.  I learnt to love the entire creation through the guides.
MM:	And when you were older yourself were you ever tempted to go back and become a leader?
AD:	I sort of - I think I started to go with a boy, I think that was what it was [both laugh].  And I came out when I thought I was past uniform you know, and black stockings and all that sort of thing.  And of course I was in the church choir by that time.
MM:	What about earlier?  Were your family churchgoers?
AD:	Yes, we were.
MM:	Your mother would take you to Sunday services?
AD:	Yes, she did.  When we were young we all went together.
MM:	Were there any other activities associated with the church?
AD:	We were so much in the guides - there was a girls club you know and all that kind of thing but it didn’t attract me like the guides did, so it didn’t.  Except Sunday School, of course.
MM:	How long did you keep that up for?
AD:	I was going to Sunday School until I was about seventeen and then the conditions that I got leaving on was that I would go to an afternoon service in the City Y.M. on a Sunday afternoon.  It was all part of growing up; that was what we did.
MM:	That was a condition your mother laid down?  
AD:	It was yes.
MM:	So she was quite strict about it?
AD:	Oh she was, yes, about Sunday.
MM:	And how about your friends, would they have come from similar backgrounds?
AD:	Yes, we were.  Some of them were better off, you know, from the standpoint that they had fathers, mothers, working and that.  But you sort of made a friend in the class you were in and that was it, you know.
MM:	What about - as far as I can tell from talking to people in the Catholic community, they didn’t really go outside of their immediate neighbourhood.  They didn’t really see the other side, for want of a better description.  Would that have been true of your experience of childhood?
AD:	You mean from a Protestant/Catholic point of view?
MM:	Yes, you know that you were going to school in a Protestant school and you went to a Protestant church, did you see Catholic children at any point?
AD:	Well, strangely, my mother’s closest friend when we were young children was a Catholic lady and we went as a family and visited each other’s homes.  There was a [pause] my mother must have known her before she was married, I think they must have lived and grown up in the same street or something.  But when my mother got married so did Mrs. Mulholland.  She was Mrs. Mulholland when she got married.  Smith was her maiden name.  And the first year that my mother was married, Nora was born and the first year Mrs. Mulholland was married, her first daughter was born so they had - then I was born and she also had a second girl.  So these were Catholic girls and a Catholic family and Mrs. Smith’s husband died and by that time my mother was expecting Frank.  So you see my mother had the third child but they were both left widows.  They were very young.  But I remember walking - it was quite a walk to where they lived, you know, to visit.  We always went to visit their home, so we did, there was never any Catholic/Protestant thing much, we were all people, and we grew up with them and knew them well.  And I think with me it has been like that throughout my life because not in the Ormeau Bakery but after I was married I drifted into full-time office work and it was Catholic girls and boys all the time, you know, and I never had any of those problems [laughs].
MM:	The Ormeau Bakery was mainly a Protestant workforce?
AD:	It was completely Protestant.
MM:	It seems very similar to the Guinness’s Brewery in Dublin where there was a large Catholic workforce but all of the management positions were filled by Protestants.  I suppose it’s natural that a minority group would chose to look after each other.  With the Catholic women who never went outside of their own area - it wasn’t so much that the Catholic women had any prejudice but that all of their activities were so connected with people in their own area that they never actually met anyone outside their own community.
AD:	We knew the Smiths - I actually call them Smith Mulholland, that was her married name but because Evelyn and Norah were about the same age and then Molly and myself, you know and my mother kept up the friendship for years until Mrs. Smith died.  But I can well remember walking - you see, you walked everywhere in those days.  I mean with my mother’s hand, we were as young as that when we went to visit them.  They both went into teaching; I don’t know where they are now.  We just lost touch throughout the years but right up until I retired [pause] well, you’d have heard of Eddie McGrady the Nationalist M.P., well Eddie’s sister was my closest friend.
MM:	So you had long hikes with the girl guides, did you have any other sporting activities?
AD:	No there wasn’t a lot of sport of school in my day.  Maybe exercises like drill, you know that type of thing, you know.  
MM:	You didn’t play hockey or anything?
AD:	No, I played table tennis but that was in church days, you know the church club.  The lawn tennis club, I played there and then, I loved - table tennis would have been my favourite.  I played on teams you know and matches.
MM:	It does strike me that it’s very different now in that schools at least recognise the value of having children involved in sports and teams.  Though I suppose the educational system was considerably more primitive then?
AD:	That’s right.
MM:	When you were going into school, was the school attached to the church or was it a state school?
AD:	Yes, our school was attached to the church.  You see, it was an elementary school.
MM:	And what sort of classes, what size classes would you have had?
AD:	We didn’t talk about P1, P2 and P3 and all in those days, you know, we talked about the infants and then a second, third and fourth class which we talked about, was downstairs.  Then when you were seven maybe or eight, you went upstairs to the senior school and then you went there for second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth was the height of the school, you know.  I remember arriving in sixth standard, I was just thirteen and I had two years there before I could leave school.  Actually, they would - I told you they would have liked me to go on to be a teacher but money wasn’t available, there wasn’t the opportunities in those days that young people have now.
MM:	You mentioned too that sometimes you would taken the class in the teacher’s absence – how many children would there have been?
AD:	Oh, there would have been - I’m sure twenty.  The classes were big, you know, so they were.
MM:	In the South - I did my primary education in the late 1950s and I can remember when I first went into school when I was five there was a class of sixty.  It was quite common.
AD:	Oh yes, indeed.
MM:	What sort of lessons did you have?  Was it just the three Rs or were they broader than that?  You know, the reading, writing, and arithmetic?
AD:	For myself, do you mean?
MM:	Yes, when you were going through school were there any special classes other than doing the very basic education?
AD:	No, I never remember there being any special class for anything, but as far as the three Rs were concerned I had no problems ever at school.  You know, I was maybe the head girl for a while in different standards, and my writing was on the wall and had been framed at one time.  You know when you would write copies you know, I can remember it well, it was Cease to do evil, learn to do well.  That got the prize that time.
MM:	They obviously recognised that you were talented but there was no possibility of a scholarship or was it that your mother needed the money you could earn?
AD:	No, as I say there was nothing then and people were waiting, all parents were waiting for their children to go to work in those days, you know.  There wasn’t the wealth around that there is now.  You see that would have been just after the First World War, you know, we’d be talking 1920s sort of thing, you know.  You went to school - there was no talk of homework, you did your exercise as we were taught and once you did that, attendance was very important, like, you’d be in trouble if you missed school.  But for me, school was no problem.  I enjoyed school, enjoyed everything about it.
MM:	What about things like school lunches?  Did you eat in school, did you bring a packed lunch?
AD:	Yes, we often took a packed lunch, probably bread and butter and jam, very often it was sandwiches and you carried that with you.  We only got half an hour then, anyway, you know, at school.  It was a break just of a half hour, so it was, like from twelve to half twelve or thereabouts and then coming back from one to three.
MM:	And would they have been single sex, were the boys separate from the girls?
AD:	No, it was a mixed class.  The boys sat of course together and the girls together but there was a mixed class.
MM:	And what about teachers?  Were they male and female or were they predominantly one?  Generally, statistics show that now most primary teachers are female whereas as children get older they’re as likely to have male teachers.
AD:	Well when I was at school the teachers were all female except the headmaster.  There was one man, he was very clever and he was the headmaster but all the other teachers would be female.
MM:	Would he have much to do with day-to-day teaching or he would have simply an administrator?
AD:	Oh yes, he did, he taught.
MM:	Was this the older pupils or all?
AD:	Yes, he did.
MM:	What about schoolbooks?  Did you have your own or did the school supply them?
AD:	Well yes, you had to get your own schoolbooks but I mean you were talking in those days of threepence and sixpence and things like that, you know.
MM:	But then wages were very low.
AD:	Yes, wages were very low.  And jotters, I remember when you got a jotter you had to use both sides of the page, you know not to waste any.
MM:	And would you have been able to get books from your sister or they have changed from year to year?
AD:	I can’t really remember much of that.  I’m sure at the time I probably did.  We were very close on one another you know, she would just be a class ahead of me.
MM:	I love haunting second hand bookshops and I found a geography book a few months ago and it had obviously been passed on because the flyleaf started off with one name and then there were six names after that and they’d just been crossed off but they all had the same surname.  So I think each child who got it was putting their own mark on the book.  It was lovely.
AD:	Yes.
MM:	Obviously, given the help your mother got after your father died and Frank was born, there was a good neighbourhood network.
AD:	Oh yes.  Neighbours were very good in those days.
MM:	How would that show itself, what sort of things would they do for each other apart from minding children?
AD:	We had a very good neighbour.  It was a case of her door was always open for us, you know, it wasn’t that she did - she did mind Frank, she did, she nursed him until he was school age and would have taken us in there you know when we would come home.  When we were maybe six, seven, eight years old, we came home to the house, and there was a note with what your job was, that you had to do, so there was. 
MM:	Your mother didn’t want you to be idle at home?
AD:	No, people were different in those days, it was a very close community you know.  You could have gone into one another’s house and everything.  That was before we moved to the Donegall Road but we were all working then and grownup.
MM:	It does sound much more appealing because now you have to go to quite a lot of trouble to make sure that whoever is looking after your children can be trusted if you go out to work.
AD:	I know, indeed, it wasn’t like that in those days.  You weren’t afraid to go out at night even in my teenage years we used to wait for a full moon to go for a walk over the hills.  I mean, who would ever go out now?
MM:	You can’t go out in the full moon because all the lunatics come out. [Both laugh]
AD:	We loved the moonlight, and lovely nights and everything, but you can’t do it now, I’m telling you.
MM:	Do you think the quality of life has changed for the worse?
AD:	Well it has, it’s changed a lot, but I would say in most ways for the better.  It’s a pity that people aren’t neighbourly like they were in those days.  There was a lovely comfort to be got from knowing who was next door and whose home you could go into and you could have them in.  Or if you were short of something you could run next door to see - but I think the standard of life is better now for everybody.
MM:	Materially, anyway?
AD:	Materially, yes, that’s right.
MM:	It’s something I’m conscious of myself in recollection of my childhood and I think of my daughter’s.  She’s twenty-two now and very independent but I had to protect her a great deal more than my mother needed to protect me when I was young.  My mother tells me about her childhood – well, she was much like yourself and would have been able to roam fairly widely.
AD:	Yes, we were out on the street playing for hours at a time, indeed.  And as I say, we went off to the parks and did our own thing.  Played ball, threw skipping ropes, all this kind of thing.  That doesn’t exist any more.
MM:	Was there a - you just knew when you had to come back in?
AD:	Oh yes, you just knew that you’d better go home, type of thing.  You were in trouble if you were late coming in.
MM:	What about discipline?  Being a single parent I’m aware that it can be difficult trying to bring children up by yourself.  Would your mother have found that she had to lay down fairly strict rules?
AD:	Oh she did, we used to tell her when we were growing up how strict she was with us but she’d say you know, I had to be father and mother both.  So there was no time for sort of nonsense of any kind, you were always on orders [laughs].
MM:	Would you remember, I know maybe it’s not something you thought about at the time, would you have seen the man’s role as being the authoritarian one.  When your mother said she’d to be father and mother both that she was the wage earner and the disciplinarian yet she was there comforting you.
AD:	That’s right, she was both.  We must have missed out a lot in not having enjoyed having a father, being you never could remember saying Daddy or Dad or anything like that.  It was always Mother and when we saw her coming, if we hadn’t our jobs done [pause].
MM:	Would you have any kind of relationship with your parents’ families?
AD:	We never knew my father’s father but my mother’s father, yes, he came often to see us but we were never really close, you know.
MM:	You obviously didn’t feel that you needed him at the time?
AD:	No, not at the time, no.  We had most things that all children had.  We were fortunate to have an auntie who was very good at making clothes and things.  She sewed quite a bit for us you know.  We used to buy the material and get things made.
MM:	What about special occasions like birthdays and Christmas?  Would that have been a source of stress for your mother, trying to make extra money to make ends meet?
AD:	Oh yes, she did everything she could to make money.  I mean she was working out, as I told you and we had - we took in work, you know linen work, you know clipping from different warehouses, there was a big one in Great Victoria Street where we had to take it back and sometimes do it again.  Pillowslips and tablecloths, you’d clip the threads off and fold them and it was so much a dozen.  So we did that and my mother took in washing for other people as well as being out working, yes.  
MM:	And did she have a washing machine to do that?
AD:	Oh dear no, there was no washing machine.  It was all hand wash and we had a mangle.
MM:	Did you help her with the mangle?
AD:	Oh yes, we had to turn it and Thursday was ironing night.  I had to do the ironing.  We all had our jobs, you see.
MM:	Would you feel that in later life that it stood to you, that it made you more self-sufficient?
AD:	Yes I do, I think it if good for you really.  I mean I often think that a child, who grows up spoilt, with maybe grandparents and parents and all, it must be hard for them to get started to do things for themselves or leave home.  Even get married and start keeping a house.  I mean we had done all kinds of housework, house cleaning and we had to do it the right way [laughs].
MM:	In addition to the housework, what about maintenance of the house?  Would the landlord have looked after that?  The bigger things like painting and maybe fixing things?
AD:	I can’t remember much.  I think my mother used to do quite a bit of painting herself, she did most things maybe with getting a bit of help from someone but I can’t ever recall any painter and decorator being brought in you know, to be paid type of thing, you know.
MM:	That would have been quite a luxury?
AD:	It would have been.
MM:	What about in the neighbourhood - I love the old photographs where you see all the women out on the doorsteps and they’re chatting or scrubbing the doorsteps or there’s some community thing going on.  Would you remember that from one when you were young?
AD:	Yes, I do remember when we were quite young people standing at the doors, on summer nights you know, talking, chatting, maybe finally ending up all in the one house.  When we were children you were skipping or swinging on a lamppost or something and they were all out watching us, you know.  But it was a very close-knit community when we were growing up, I must say that.   I mean, one of the neighbours’ daughters took us to school when we were young, you know, and saw us home and the lady who lived next door who nursed Frank also looked after us.  We always did what we had to do you know, before Mother coming home.
MM:	What about when you moved to Donegall Road then, was it different?
AD:	Oh well, we were working then.  We were all working at that time and we were so pleased about getting out onto the front of the road, a nice house with a bathroom, that was great.
MM:	And would you have known your neighbours there?
AD:	Yes, we did.  We knew the girl who lived next door.  My mother died in that home and that’s where I was married and away from.  The next-door neighbour, she was wonderful.  My sister was working like although she was still at home with mother and when Norah couldn’t be there, Muriel was there for my mother too, you know.  Yes, we had lovely neighbours there.  Actually, on the other side there was a lady who lived in the street where we were born.  She came to live beside us again so it was [pause].
MM:	Was that because she knew your mother was there?
AD:	Yes, she did.
MM:	Do you think that the war changed any of that?  You know, that so many houses were destroyed in the old areas, or very badly damaged?
AD:	Oh yes, people were living everywhere and the houses were blitzed.  They were in ruins and they were in halls.  We fortunately, we had to get out every time the sirens went, as I told you, but we never were moved from home, you know.  People had to take houses wherever one came so it did break up neighbourhoods quite a bit, so it did, yes.
MM:	And do think the neighbourhoods recovered after the war?
AD:	Well, it took a long time but when they recovered they were far better places.  I mean homes were improved and I think - they were.  The Northern Ireland Housing Executive came on the scene then and they built lovely estates everywhere.  This [indicating own home] is a Northern Ireland Housing Executive home - these are.  Cosy wee places for one person, I mean for two, my husband was here with me.  Two people can live quite comfortably in one of these houses.
MM:	A bit of thought went into their design.
AD:	That’s right, there’s a place for everything and then you’re all right.
MM:	Well that seems like a good place to finish.
AD:	I hope it was some good to you.
MM:	Oh absolutely, thank you again. 

Alice, 12th August and 20th September 1999

AD1

