Catherine and Betty.  Interview: 24th October 1995 and 22nd January 1996

MM:	Mrs. O’T. when were you born?
COT:	1906.  
MM:	What a good age.  
BOT:	She’ll be ninety in January.
COT:	I have seven children.  I had one little girl when I lived in another house, far away from here, and she died.  Well, actually, through neglect - the doctor - she got scarlet fever and he left me to look after her and I was expecting another baby at the time and the little girl, four year old, she died.
MM:	When was that?
COT:	That was years back, before the World War [pause] somewhere around 1937.  Then she was buried say this day and I got the scarlet fever and of course, I was expecting a baby that very day.  So when, they took away the hearse and the funeral went off I was taken in the ambulance to Cork Street fever hospital and I had a baby girl.  Of course, I had to stay there till the scarlet went off, the scarlet fever.  They treated it and that, and then when I come home there was a couple of the other children after getting it too.  They were taken to hospital but what’s this I was going to say there before that? [pause]. But I worked in Dollards, anyhow, it was a printing house opposite the Dolphin Hotel, Dollards were, a big printing place, my father worked in it too.  I was on a machine, printing, you know, and feeding the paper into it and it would all come out the other end. 
MM:	Was that counted as skilled work?
COT:	Oh yes, it was, yes.
MM:	Did you have to do an apprenticeship?  Were you trained?
COT:	No.  Well, I was very young at the time, I was really only [pause] I wasn’t really the age to be working, I was thirteen only.  
MM:	So you left school early.
COT:	In those days, you had to go to work, sort of, you know.  It was a bad time.  
MM:	What about your own family? Were your parents alive then?
COT:	Yes, they were.  And you see my father worked there too and he was on the machine I was on, he was working at it and I’d be doing the rest of the work, sort of.  I was nine years there and then, of course, I left to get married.  But anyhow, I had, as I tell you, seven children when their daddy died.  Betty was the eldest, and the youngest was a boy, three.  Three and a half, was he, three?  Well now, he’s married and he has five, boys and one girl married.  He was the youngest, but I [pause] now Guinness’s gave me no offer, they were treating my husband for five years with a duodenal ulcer.  Dr. P., he was doing no good for him, he was going out in pain in the morning.  He had to go out and work and he’d be coming home, in pain all day, and all this doctor would give him was a bit of stomach powder, to ease the pain, you know.
MM:	And your husband worked in Guinness’s?
COT:	He worked in Guinness’s, yes.  
MM:	What did he do there?
COT:	He was making barrels.  He was a cooper, a cooper yes.  He worked very hard.  But [pause] he was after being out sick for a week and when he went back this Doctor P. took him out and I went in and I gave out to the doctor.  I said I don’t understand you Dr. P..  My husband is in pain every day, going to work and back and I think you should let him go to hospital, to get something done.   There’s no need for that he said, I’ll take him out and I’ll treat him.  After a week he was no better and he was, he came back home on the Friday and that night, at 11 o’clock, he took bad.  It was a November night and talk about tonight, the rain and the storm, there was nothing like it and we couldn’t get a doctor or an ambulance or anything until 5 in the morning.  Eh, doctors in those days didn’t have big cars like what they have now.  I had, the two young boys, one was ten and the other was eleven, they had to put coats on, it was lashing rain, they had to put coats and go out to get a doctor.  They went to Sackville Road, and that doctor, a very nice man, they had to go down there [pause] I forget his name now [pause]
BOT:	O’Connell.
COT:	Dr. O’Connell, he came up by a bike, he had a bike, he came and he was drowned and the two children were drowned.  And he was in an awful way over it.  He said this is terrible and he cried, really, when he saw all the young children.  And to think that he was getting treated all that time and they could no nothing for him, you know.  Anyhow, the ulcer had burst and that was 11 o’clock on the Friday night and by the time the man next door came in and sat with us and by the time we got an ambulance [pause] he went to the Adelaide Hospital and they never done a thing for him until the next morning, they brought him up to the theatre for an operation [pause] left the poison going through him all night, instead of operating immediately, you know.
MM:	Why was that?
COT:	Well, in those days they hadn’t what they have now, well they hadn’t got [pause] 
MM:	And this was in the 1940s?
COT:	1942.
BOT:	1943.  We came here to live in 1942 and my father died in 1943, November.  
COT:	We lived in an old house before that.
BOT:	He never got over that operation.  
MM:	Had you been able to go with him to the hospital or did you have to stay here?
COT:	Yes, the children stayed here and the man that was with them, and my own, one brother I had at the time, he came with us too, but we were sitting in the hospital there all the night and they brought him to the theatre about 11 o’clock the next morning and they operated on him then, but he was very bad, he only lasted about three days.
BOT:	They operated on him on the Saturday morning and he died the following Saturday.
MM:	How old was he at the time?
COT:	40 was he? I was 39 myself but anyhow, when things happened I went in to Guinness’s to see Dr. P. and of course I told him off, that he was responsible for his death and he should have had him in hospital and having the operation when he was able to have it.  Oh, he said these things happen, you know they make excuses.  So I said well I’ve six young children, now what do I do?  Well, he said, you can come into work, he said, at six every morning.  I used to leave here at half past five.
MM:	Doing what?
COT:	Cleaning.  Scrubbing and cleaning.  
MM:	That’s all they offered you?
COT:	That’s all they offered me.  Of course, if I hadn’t had something to buck them up and say well, you’ve got to do something, you’re responsible for him.  Of course, I get a small pension from them every fortnight.
MM:	Is that because you worked for them or because your husband did?
BOT:	Because my father worked for them.  Daddy worked 25 years in Guinness.
COT:	I get 60 something pence every fortnight
BOT:	£68.  
BOT:	When she started there first she had something like £2 a week.
COT:	That’s all.
MM:	This was to keep yourself and six children?
BOT:	And £2 from the government.
COT:	Yes.  I got £3 for myself and 2/6 for each child.  
MM:	This was because you were a widow?
COT:	Yeah. Widow’s pension but I got it tough really, because I had to get up in the morning and leave them.  And Betty was the eldest, of course, and she used to have them [pause] I’d be back at half nine and Betty would them ready to go out to school, you know.
MM:	And how old were you at the time?
COT:	She was 12.
BOT:	Now Mammy was in that job then for, she was in it for about two years.  And the mornings were getting too hard for her so she brought home the laundry from Guinness’s, the roller towels and table cloths and serviettes, and she used have to wash them.
COT:	I used to be here washing them until three in the morning. 
BOT:	Because at that time there were no washing machines.
COT:	And I had to carry them, in a big parcel, down.
MM:	Did you have to get them dry as well?
COT:	And dry them, winter, summer and I only got two days to do them, every two days, and the roller towels were like a board, you know, you had to have them rolled and I used to iron them damp, and you know, there’d be in those jobs, all the towels, roller towels.
MM:	And did you get paid a fixed rate for that? You didn’t get paid per piece?
COT:	No, no. It was a flat rate.  Just a few bob, you know. 
BOT:	I can’t remember now how much she got for that, but it wasn’t an awful lot. 
COT:	But anyhow, I had to get through and carry on.  In those days, but, you got nothing like what they’re getting now.  You know what I mean [pause] child allowance and all that.  There was nothing like that in those days.
MM:	It must have been quite a struggle.
COT:	Oh, don’t talk. It was terrible.
MM:	And how long [pause] when you went in first for the cleaning, you went in at 6 o’clock in the morning. How did you get to work?
COT:	I’d be in at 6.  I’d leave here at half five and I’d have to walk down the Canal, walk into James’s Street and round by the harbour.
MM:	It’s a good walk.
COT:	Yeah, all around from the Black Jar.
BOT:	In the winter we’d, my brother and I or my two brothers, we’d walk some of the way with her, you know.
COT:	Because I used to be afraid in the dark. 
BOT:	Only in the winter.
MM:	And when you got in, you were cleaning, what sort of area?
COT:	I might get two flights of stairs to scrub, and eh, all the usual, kitchens, washing and cleaning all the time, you know, whatever was there.  I got home by about half nine, to see that the children got out to school, you know.
MM:	And then you had to do your own housework?
COT:	Oh yeah, I’d have a load of work to do, maybe for them too.  They might say to me, will you bring home the towels and do them, because we’re short of towels.
MM:	Did they never use a laundry service?
COT:	Never.  I’ll tell you how I used to [pause] I used to wash sheet, pillow slips and all, because there was a night staff of number one clerks, and they used to stay, they’d be the night clerks and some of them would be sleeping there and of course, they’d beds in James’s Street there.  
BOT:	In 101 James’s Street they had a place for night clerks, they slept there.
COT:	And I’d have to wash the bed linen, iron and wash and there was a big bath I had here but that’s all changed.  I have a daughter in Australia and before she went she furnished the place, I took all her stuff.  She went and her hubby and her two children to Australia.  
(224 words removed relating to daughter in Australia)
MM:	Well, the doctor’s attitude was obviously pretty awful.  Did you think that was typical of the management in Guinness’s?
COT:	There was an awful lot of men died from neglect in Guinness’s, at that time.  Pure neglect, you know.  They were supposed to be getting treated and they weren’t getting treated.  They’d tell you anything to keep you going.
BOT:	Well, they didn’t know much about duodenal ulcers, you know, and they could only treat it with what they knew.
COT:	A bit of stomach powder, that’s all.
BOT:	I think it was just magnesia powder.
MM:	But there wasn’t any question of having disability or going on sick leave? You had to work?
BOT:	There was nothing like that.
COT:	Oh yeah, you had to work.  
MM:	Were you treated well by the people in Guinness’s?  I mean, you obviously worked extremely hard.
COT:	Oh I did, you had no time to talk or anything.  You were watching the clock, with them at home, you were worried about everything, you know.
MM:	And who gave you, did you have a supervisor?
COT:	Well, no, you just knew what you had to do.
BOT:	No but you had a woman to tell you what to do.
MM:	And would you have gotten on well with her?
COT:	Oh, I got on very well.  That’s why they said to me, if there was too much for me, to go home and have the worry of the children.  That’s why they gave me the chance of the washing, they said they’d put me on and you could take home the washing and do it for us.  And I’d be here until three in the morning I needn’t tell, especially when you only got such a short time to have them ready.
MM:	It sounds like you were working harder that way.
COT:	Yeah. 
BOT:	We had to help, you know.
COT:	The thing is, I was home, like you know, and it helped me to look after the younger children, you know.  
MM:	And would there have been other women in the same position as yourself?
COT:	Ah yes.  God, there was women used to walk for miles.  There was women used to have to walk from the South Circular Road, down, you never got any help in bringing it in or anything.
BOT:	When we’d be leaving Mammy down in the morning we used to meet this man out of Guinness’s, he worked on the jetty.  And that man had to walk from Bluebell every morning, down at five o’clock, and he was an old man then, he was well [pause] well to me he was an old man, I think he was in his forties or fifties, but we used to meet him in the mornings, walking down along the road.
COT:	It was the early mornings [pause] that you know, having to be up.
BOT:	She had to be up at five to be in.
COT:	Oh God, I used to be up before five because [pause].
BOT:	After years, Guinness used to send out a car, like a van, to pick up the women to bring them into work, but was much later.
MM:	And were you still working for them at that stage?
COT:	No, I wasn’t.  Things changed, like. The work my husband had, he was a tradesman, and it was a very hard job, the cooperage.  You know, making the barrels that the drink was put into, you know.  Making those, and all he had was £5.  Just image, pay rent, pay everything, feed them, dress them, and pay all the bits of bills, gas, electric, that you get, out of that.  That was the hardest part of all.
MM:	So you were finding it hard then, before he died?
COT:	Oh, yes, indeed I did, hard all the time it was.
MM:	I talked to another lady who was very badly paid as well and she said it made her careful of money for the rest of her life.
BOT:	Well, it’s funny you should mention that, when I started to work I got like that.  I always, I was always so afraid I wouldn’t have maybe fivepence for tomorrow, you know that kind of way, so it did make me careful of money when I was younger. Until I got on in years, and then I realised [laughs].  But of course I had more to spend then than when I was younger.
COT:	When you think of the girls now the way they spend money and all, of course the wages, they’ve got big wages, they didn’t then. It’s awful; it’s terrible the way the widows were treated though.  They think they’re bad now, God, those days [pause]
MM:	At the time [pause] you’d had a skilled job before you got married.  Did you ever think of going back to that?
COT:	Well, no, because I’d be out all day.  I wouldn’t be in me home looking after my family, you know, like they were very young, you had to watch them coming from school.  And meet them and bring them home, afraid anything would happen them and all that sort of thing, you know.  What I used to do, I used to go up to school and bring them home and all that.  It wasn’t easy, like you know.
MM:	I’m sure it wasn’t.
COT:	In those days, there was no help in any way.  Now sure, look at the way they’re treated now.  My God, they’re treated with kid gloves.  
MM:	What about the children’s education? You were obviously keen to make sure they got to school.
COT:	Oh, they all went to school.  The boys went to the Christian Brothers up in Inchicore, St. Michael’s, and I lived in Old County Road [pause]
BOT:	Before we came to live here, we lived in Kilmainham, and Maureen and I, we went to Loreto College, the national part, and my other sister, the one in Australia, she went to Goldenbridge school in Inchicore, and both my brothers went to Inchicore.
MM:	Yes.  When you came here in 1942, was this a Corporation house?
COT:	Yes. It was only finished.
BOT:	We were the last tenants in here.  Well, we were the first tenants in this house, but the last in the estate.  
MM:	Yeah.  Was that an improvement on the house you’d had before?
BOT:	Ah no, we had a beautiful house before.
COT:	Ah it was lovely.  
BOT:	But we couldn’t afford to keep it up, because the rent was always high and Mammy couldn’t manage it.  So that’s why she had to give that up when Daddy was sick.  So when we came here, the rent was better, it was like 10 shillings a week. 
MM:	And when he was sick, he didn’t get paid?
COT:	Only sick pay, he got.  We weren’t able to cope on his wages. I had my poor mother and father then, Lord rest them, and they were good, they’d help me out, you know, a few bob.
MM:	Did they live close by?
COT:	They did, they just lived down in Kilmainham. 
BOT:	They had a little grocery shop at the bottom of Kilmainham Road.
COT:	And they’d help me out, give me a bit of stuff to feed them and that, you know.  
BOT:	My grandad had a market garden at the back of the shop and they always gave us fresh vegetables and that.  He was ninety-five when he died.
COT:	They were very good.
BOT:	My grandmother died three months after my father died.  She was sixty-four.  My father died on the 16 November and my grandmother died in January.
COT:	My mother had a big family, there was twelve of them.  Four died when they were young, different, you know those days [pause] it was different.  They’d fevers and all things going, you know.  Scarlet fever and everything.
(152 words removed at request of interviewees)
MM:	And before your husband died, during the war when there were no increases in wages, did you find that had made a difference as well?
COT:	Oh yes, of course, yes. 
MM:	What about prices at the time?
COT:	Well, sure, the food was very cheap.  The butter, all that [pause]
MM:	Still, if you were only getting half a wage?
COT:	That’s true, you had to manage.  
BOT:	You could get a quarter of tea for sixpence or ninepence, the packet of tea now, the cheapest you’d get would be, what, one pound fifty nine or sixty-nine pee.
COT:	All the food was very cheap then.
MM:	What sort of things would you have fed the kids on?
COT:	Well, whatever I could manage, you know.  I’d give them porridge every morning; that was cheap.  I always made porridge; even now, I make it for Betty and myself.  But I’ve arthritis in me knees and I’m not able to walk.  I haven’t been out in four years.
BOT:	The only day she’ll, we go out, is Saturday and Sunday and I bring her in the car but otherwise she’s at home.  We always had plenty of vegetables.  My grandparents had a grocery shop, they had a food shop, so we always had plenty of vegetables and we often went to the [pause] what do you call those shops with the ration, where you got the rationed food, tea and that, sugar, during the war years.  There was a shop down there in O’Connell Street where you went.
MM:	This was especially for the things that were rationed?
BOT:	You had a ration card, you see, a ration book.
MM:	For each of you?
BOT:	For each of the children and you’d so many ounces of butter, so many ounces of tea, sugar, and then the bread then was like, it wasn’t white bread it was brown bread because they hadn’t got the flour.  But I often went to Thomas Street for maybe two ounces of butter or tea, or maybe a half-pound of sugar.  Well that would have to last you maybe for a week.  It all depended on how many coupons you had left, you know.
MM:	What about fuel for heat?
BOT:	Well, we had turf or briquettes then, there was very little coal and we had a voucher for turf.  We had to go and collect the turf ourselves in a little pushcar or whatever we had, you know, to collect it.
MM:	And do you remember this thing of the turf being stacked in the Phoenix Park?
BOT:	I do.  Because I had an aunt, my Daddy’s sister-in-law, she lived over there at the Royal Hospital.  You see, we lived in Kilmainham when I was very young, just down from the Royal Hospital and my, this aunt of mine she had no children of her own and of course, we lived round the corner and we were always with her, my two other sisters and myself.  And when we’d come from school, sometimes my aunt Marie would meet us outside the school and she’d bring us to the Phoenix Park to collect sticks or branches of the trees and turf in bags.  Oh, I remember the turf was stacked in the Park.
MM:	So, you all chipped in.
COT:	They had to.
MM:	And apart from the scarlet fever, would you say that generally as children you were healthy?
BOT:	Very healthy indeed.  We all got the scarlet fever together.  My sister got it first and they didn’t treat her properly for it.  Now my brother, my eldest brother that’s away, he was ten years old then, and he was about, about twelve months before she died he fell off a wall and broke his neck and he was in plaster of paris from here to here and all you could see was his two eyes, his nose and his mouth.
COT:	He was chasing a cat on a wall and the wall went up that way, you know.
BOT:	Now the day he got the plaster off his neck my sister died of scarlet fever.  That was on the Saturday, and she was buried on the Monday morning.  And my sister that’s away now, she was born in Cork Street fever hospital, she was the only baby ever born in Cork Street [laughs]. 
MM:	That’s marvellous [laughs]. 
COT:	It’s a home now for old people.  
BOT:	But then the following Sunday, John, that’s the boy that broke his neck, he got the fever and I was brought then the following Monday to Patrick Duns.  I was there for Christmas.  I always remember Santy Claus coming around, he was one of the doctors, Dr. Thompson, I always remember him, and he did Santy Claus.  I was seven [pause] I was about eight, and one of my brothers, Peadar, he didn’t get it, and my sister that was born and my father, he didn’t get it, but I had to be locked up, I had to be in quarantine.
MM:	But you were allowed be quarantined in the house?
BOT:	No, we had to move out.  We had to be quarantined; we weren’t allowed to stay.
COT:	It was raging at the time, the scarlet. Raging.  Well, how my little one died, Gertrude, she was a lovely girl, a beautiful child, only four, the doctor I had, Dr. McCabe, he’s dead now [pause]
BOT:	Mammy had engaged him for the birth.  Mammy had a few of us were born at home.  Two of us.
COT:	Three and I had five in the Rotunda. 
MM:	How did that compare?
COT:	Well, I was, it was handier to stay at home.
BOT:	Why did you stay home to have the other two?
COT:	Well, it was more or less handier with the others, to have them in the house.
MM:	So it was your youngest two you had at home?
BOT:	No, myself and John were born in the Rotunda, Paddy was born at home, and Maureen [pause] Gertie, where was Gertie born, was it in the Rotunda?
COT:	No Gertie was born at home and Maureen.  So Gertie and Maureen and Paddy, three were born at home. 
BOT:	My brother Paddy was born, he was a breech birth - you tell this story [laughs].
COT:	I was going out into the yard this night and the bin was outside the back door.  You know the way kids pull things around when they’re in the back.  And when I opened the back door, it was right up the door, the bin and didn’t I fall right into the bin and eh, that’s what happened me then.
MM:	The baby started to come?
COT:	He was a breech birth.
BOT:	It was a funny thing, John was born on Christmas Day, Paddy was born on New Year’s Day the next year, New Year’s Eve rather the next year [pause] and the doctor that Mammy had engaged for the birth, he was a lovely doctor, and when she sent for them, they were arrived in their dress suits.
COT:	They came out in their dress suits, and got into their white coats and things and I was eh, I had the pains and all but [pause] what happened was [pause] the doctor didn’t realise that it was a breech birth and they had to wait for an hour before they could do anything because the, Paddy had to be turned, they had to turn the baby in me before it was born.  So, I could write a book on me life [laughs].
BOT:	She always remembers them in their lovely dress suits and their white shirts and bow ties [laughs].
MM:	And they kept them on, did they?
BOT:	Yes, they put their white coats over them.
MM:	So Paddy came into the world in style.
COT:	They were at a ball, at a ball, the doctors.  There was two doctors, Dr. McKay and his cousin, oh from London, with him and he came with him that night.  
MM:	Did they stay the whole time?
COT:	They were there the whole time, yeah, until the baby was born.
MM:	And was your husband involved in the birth?
COT:	Well, he was there all the time really [pause] God, he was never well.
BOT:	He was probably looking after us.  I was three years old when Paddy was born.
MM:	So you really had your children one year after the other?
BOT:	There’s a year and three months between John and I and eleven months between John and Paddy.  Two years between Paddy and my sister Gertrude, who died. And then there was three years between her and Maureen.  Then three years between Maureen and Colleen and five years between Colleen and Will.
COT:	In those days you went by your religion to have a family, you had to have a family according to your religion.  That’s if you were married, whether you wanted to or not, like you know.  The priests, you couldn’t go to confession, unless that you were living a proper life to have your family and not avoid it but it’s different now, of course.
MM:	So, when you got married you just assumed that you would be giving up work?
COT:	Oh, yes.
MM:	You gave up straight away?
COT:	Oh yes sure.  I was exactly ten months married when Betty was born so I had no, I didn’t get a chance, and then I had all the family, I had one every year [pause] or like every two years.  It’s just the way it was [pause].
MM:	Times have changed.
COT:	Yeah, indeed they have. Changed for the worse, not for the better and its getting worse.  
BOT:	On the whole we had, now I know now my father died at that time and, we really never, we had enough to keep us going and we were never without a meal, I have to say that and there [pause] I had my father’s sister, she was very good to me, she was my godmother and she always made sure I had things, that I was well dressed and that, you know.  And then my grandfather, Mammy’s father, he helped with the rest of the children, with different things.  
MM:	So it was really the extended family that made life possible?
COT:	I would have had to, make ends meet, like you know.  That’s why I took other jobs up like, going to work in those hospitals, you know.  I left Guinness’s, and finished with the washing, I gave that up then and I was at home and I look for work and got that, in the hospitals.  I could have, now, in the - what do you call it the Adelaide, no, it wasn’t the Adelaide, it was [pause] no, I was working over in Baggot Street.
BOT:	Baggot Street Hospital.
COT:	Baggot Street, well I could be there.  I was there and I was getting on very well but there was a few, a couple of people working there and eh, they were very rude and you know, I was always very clean and I’d be doing things.  Now, I, there was a press there and there was nothing there only dirty jars, the big brown jars that Lambs used to have years ago, big jars, there was a press full of them, filthy dirty, this big press, and I said to the forewoman that was over me, I said I’d like to clean out that press there.  Oh God, she said, you wouldn’t be able to do that and I said I will.  She said, what’ll you do with the jars and I said I’ll take them out and wash them, which I did and the other women were all jealous and they’d be made and they’d try and injure you when they’d see you so anxious to do this type of work, because they wouldn’t do it.
MM:	It was extra? 
COT:	Well, it was in the day’s work.  I took all the jars and washed them and had them all ready on the floor and the forewoman couldn’t believe it.  My God, she said, you’re a great woman, you really are.  I washed out all that press and left the jars and she rang up Lambs and they came out to collect them and brought them all away.  And there was a table and the legs on it were all broke, you couldn’t put anything on it and I said is there any man here that works, I said to the forewoman, is there a man here that does jobs? That table shouldn’t be like that, I said.  Could you get some man for to do this.  We’ve a carpenter here.  Well, get him over, I said, and I’ll talk to him.  He came over and I said will you do something with that table and fix those legs? Oh certainly Mrs. he said and he took the table and it was life new when he brought it back [laughs].  You know, I could see things that’d want to be done and I got going anyhow and I was very clean and any dirt that was around I’d clean it all up.  I used to love work, like that and they couldn’t believe it, but those woman, I couldn’t work with it, couldn’t cope, couldn’t work with them.  This is now the type they are.  There was a nice girl over there and they told lies on her, those two women told lies on her and got her sacked.  So I heard them on the phone ringing up Patrick Duns hospital.  She had gone there and got a job, my forewoman was telling me.  We’d a lovely little woman here, she said, but they told lies on her and she went to Patrick Duns, she’s gone over to Patrick Duns.  Now I said I heard them on the phone, I said, now it’s no business of mine but I said it’s not fair to sack a good girl.  And she was so good and I said they rang up Patrick Duns and told lies to the supervisor there about her for to sack her that she used to steal things and all.  Now, she was delighted, she rang immediately and told them in Patrick Duns that there was all a makeup lies and stories and to take on the girl, she was great, and they kept on the girl.  But these two women, those two particular women, they were dangerous; how they were kept there I don’t know.  This forewoman was afraid of them, afraid of them.  They used to have their husbands outside and they’d be bringing out bags of stuff to them, out of the hospital, butter and anything they could get.  But I believe all the hospitals the same, still today.
MM:	Well, you were obviously a great worker.  Would you never think of going for something where you might be in charge? Did you ever try to be a forewoman yourself?
COT:	Oh well, do you see, the way it was, with my young family I couldn’t do that, I’d have to spend too much time, you know and like, I was kind of quite satisfied with what I had.  
BOT:	Well then, of course, when we started to work there was really no need for her to go out, you know, and we wanted her to stay at home.
COT:	The boys got [pause] the eldest boy was a great mechanic, he was great but the money was terrible small - that’s why they went to Australia, the money was hopeless here. 
(91 words removed relating to Australia)
BOT:	My mother has never had a holiday.  One holiday she had, she went to her sister in London and that’s the only holiday she’s ever had.  She doesn’t like going anywhere.
MM:	Was that because you prefer your home or [pause]?
COT:	I’d live in me home, I love me home, I don’t want to go outside the door, I love me home.  I don’t mix; I’m a bad mixer.  Well I’d do anything for anyone else like, you know, I’d do anything for anybody.  But I’m no good for mixing or going anywhere.
MM:	So what did you do to relax, if you ever did get time?
BOT:	Back horses; she’d back a horse [laughs].
MM:	Did you go to the bookies?
COT:	Oh no.
BOT:	Well, she hasn’t been in a bookies office for about five years.
COT:	I don’t know what she’s talking about, sure I haven’t been outside the door for that, Betty.  
BOT:	That’s what I mean.  You have been in a bookies office, well up to that, what she would do, she’d go into town an odd day during the week for her messages and she’d go to the bookies.  You have to tell the truth when you’re telling this girl the story [laughs].  She has to be acting [pause] but she’d go in and back a few horses in the bookies, when she’d be in town.  Now, she still backs a few horses.
MM:	Are you a good judge?
BOT:	Yes.  Now I’d put on the bet for her now; she usually wins a few bob.
MM:	How do you decide on what you’re going to back?
BOT:	She follows the jockeys.
COT:	Well, I follows the jocks.  I know some of the jocks like, by looking at the paper and knowing how good they have been, and what they can do with horses and rides.  I’d follow them up, you know.
BOT:	At one time she went to bingo, when my uncle was alive.
COT:	He’d bring me one night a week.
MM:	And when did all this start [laughs]?
BOT:	Oh, this is going back about thirty years ago, or more.  Well you see all my grandparents were great [pause] my grandmother was a great backer of the horses.
COT:	They were all kind of like that.
BOT:	They were all gamblers.
MM:	My own grandfather loved the horses.  He died when he was eighty six but right to the last minute, he was out - he lived in Sybil Hill and he used to walk down to the nearest bookie to place his bet.  And that’s what kept him very hale and hearty.
COT:	Oh yes. It does keep you occupied.
(220 words removed relating to interviewer’s family)
BOT:	No, I’d say Mammy is backing the horses, you’re about 25 years backing the horses. Well, as the years went on, she backed quite a lot; she backs every second day now.
MM:	When you were younger, when you first got married, what did you do for fun?
COT:	Oh, we never went anywhere only working, washing and cleaning them, cleaning the house.  I went to see my mother [pause] well actually, I was in hospital myself about five times.  I was in Patrick Duns, I was in Mercers [pause] I got the jaundice three times I got the jaundice.
(66 removed relating to interruption from person at door)
BOT:	Well as you were saying, like, what did she do, well she probably went to the pictures with my father, like when we were younger and that.
MM:	When you were courting?
COT:	Yeah, we went to the pictures an odd time.
BOT:	Well I’ll tell you, she had to be in at 10 o’clock because my grandfather wouldn’t let her out.
COT:	We had to be in at 10, for God’s sake, the boys even had to be in before 10. 
MM:	And this was when you were working?
COT:	They were very strict our parents, on us, those days you know.  
MM:	And when you started work, did you have your own money to spend or did you have to give it up to your parents?
COT:	I had to hand up me bag, and I got a few pence back.  About two bob.
MM:	This was sort of your pocket money?
COT:	That’s all. 
BOT:	Sure, you only had about ten shillings a week then. 
COT:	Oh yeah, sure you got nothing.  You had to do with what you had, a few coppers. 
MM:	What did you do then;  did you get engaged to be married?
COT:	I got engaged to be married and [pause].
MM:	Were you allowed to save out of your wages at that stage, for getting married?
COT:	In those days you got nothing really.  You know the way, my hubby, Lord rest him, his mother died and his father.  
BOT:	His father died when he was six months old, my father.
BOT:	And he left six or seven children, my grandfather. 
MM:	So your mothers had hard lives as well?
COT:	Well they all worked, there was three of them worked in Guinness’s, a smeller and two coopers.
MM:	What did a smeller do?
COT:	Yes, a smeller. He used to test the drink and [pause], and they were very comfortable like, you know. But I forget what I was going to say there.  No, you had no money anyway.  
BOT:	Mary is asking you about did you do, did you get engaged or what?
COT:	Oh yes, you know the way, when you would be getting engaged, my husband’s sister, an only girl, she was a very stylish person, very grand, she had a great job and of course, she was the best dressed woman in town.  She was always kind of for herself, a lovely tall lady she was and eh, she never married.  She could have married but never bothered.  But she wasn’t very good [pause] now she’d come up an odd time to see me.
BOT:	Now before you were married, Mary’s asking you about.  When you got engaged what happened?
COT:	You know the way, when the family, some of the family are getting engaged, well they’d kind of help and give them a few bob, they’d help them out putting money by for the wedding, you know, but it wasn’t so with us, we had to just hang on to what we had and save a few bob every week to get married.  
MM:	Would you save out of your wages?
COT:	Save a few bob, but you hadn’t much.  Then my parents were good. They helped us out, you know, but Daddy’s parents wouldn’t.  
BOT:	They were dead. 
COT:	My parents helped out in every way you know, they never helped out in any way.
MM:	And what sort of things were you saving for when you got married?  Was it to buy household goods?
COT:	Well, we got a flat on the South Circular Road, next door to the doctor that was attending me, Dr. McKay, and we got a flat there, because we’d nowhere to go only to look for a flat and get it.  And we were there for a good while, six months or seven months, and of course, I was pregnant then and eh, on my first, I went home to my own home to my mother, and I stayed there.  I stayed there for about two years and we got a house, over in Kilmainham on the High Road.  My hubby knew him and he had those houses and he had this one left and he gave it to us, so we moved out over there.  
MM:	Did you rent it from him?
COT:	I only had Betty then and I was expecting John, my eldest boy, when we moved over there.  
BOT:	Before we went there, Mammy was living in a flat.
COT:	I was telling her about that.  Sure, God, when I think back, I could write a book on my life [laughs].  If I was able and had the patience.
MM:	Well, if you could start at the beginning, we’ll go through it.  Write it out for you [all laugh]. 
(159 words removed – general conversation)
COT:	Well, the war period.  I remember De Valera, up in Kilmainham Jail coming out in the lorry and he covered over in sacks.
MM:	Why?
COT:	Because he was an old IRA man.  He was no good. 
MM:	So you’re not a Fianna Fail supporter?
COT:	Oh, De Valera - if he had have [pause] the times that he was splitting up the country then, if he had of carried on and fought the British while he was at it, we would have no North, and wouldn’t have all that trouble.  We would have the North and the South, all one, but it had got so much involved and they did start, you see, and the government’s fault for allowing them to go on so far, killing people.  When they started off first they should have been stopped.
BOT:	She remembers the Black and Tans.
COT:	The Black and Tans used to come into where I worked in Dollards looking for [pause] there was a few men there, IRA men in those days, you know.  And they used to come in and look for them.  Peadar Doyle, poor old Peadar Doyle, he was the foreman there and they used to come in looking for them.
MM:	Would they have hidden the IRA men?
COT:	Oh no, they wouldn’t know they were, you see.  Because, they’d fight up against it, sort of, they’d say we don’t know what you’re talking about and all that.  You know, they’d ask me, they’d ask where’s so and so, they used to ask me where Peadar Doyle.  I said I don’t know, I said I’d never heard of him and he was there, Peadar Doyle was.  
BOT:	What did Peadar Doyle do?
COT:	He was the foreman, Peadar Doyle. 
MM:	During the war, how did you feel about De Valera keeping Ireland out of the fighting?
COT:	Oh, he was the cause of all the trouble.  It’s that man that has the North as it is today.  
BOT:	He kept us out of the war for all those years ago.  
COT:	Kept us out of what war?
BOT:	The second world war.  Only for Dev we would have been in that year.
COT:	If he had of carried on and got the North signed over at that time, he could have done [pause] with Britain [pause] he could have done it.
BOT:	We were in the Old County Road, when the bombing of the South Circular Road and the North Strand.  My father had a brother living there and he went over the next morning to see how the family was.  His house was bombed.  They got a house out of that then and they went to live in Crumlin.  
MM:	And were any of the family hurt at the time?
BOT:	No, they weren’t.  It happened about, it happened some time early in the morning.  It just blew, I think, the roof off their house, but they weren’t injured.  
COT:	Of course, we were all frightened, we thought there was a war going to start, you know.  
BOT:	But I remember that, the bombing there.
MM:	How old were you at that stage?
BOT:	I was about nine.
COT:	Kilmainham Jail there, we could here the poor fellows getting shot in the morning at five o’clock.
MM:	This was after the Rising, was it?
COT:	Yes.  That had nothing to do with the North then.  Oh, it was terrible.  Lovely lads shot.  Very respectable, lovely fellows.  
MM:	Was there very strong feeling in the family about that?
COT:	Ah yes, because we knew them, we knew the lads, they lived on the South Circular Road down there.  Very well reared and all, you know.  I can’t think now [pause] I’m not anyway used to this, me ould brain is going [laughs].  
MM:	Anyone who can still pick a winning horse at ninety is doing all right.
BOT:	She has a very long lived family.  My uncle, he died two years ago, and he was ninety.  
(203 words removed at interviewees’ request)
BOT:	The only thing, like, in those days, everything was so tight as regards money, it was a struggle for her.  Of course, today, it would be different like.
COT:	Of course everybody was in the same boat.  I say everyone was in the same boat.  That woman had nothing and she’d ask me or I’d ask her, we’d help one another, you know that way.
MM:	What about at work, did you come into contact with other Guinness workers, from other grades?
COT:	We would just talk there and that’s all.  Talk about what we were doing.
MM:	What about the office workers and managers.  Did you see them?
COT:	Oh, you’d see them; they were very nice.  
BOT:	You used to go on outings.  You never told her about your outings you’d go on, Mammy, when you were working. 
COT:	Where?
BOT:	In Dollards.
COT:	Ah yeah, well every year they’d have an outing.
MM:	And where did you go?
COT:	Well, you’d go down the country, some place in the country.
MM:	This was for all the staff, was it? Everybody?
COT:	Yes, the whole lot.  We’d go out in a big car, in a bus.
BOT:	But you didn’t go on the buses in those days.  Like, when you were working there only trams, no buses.
COT:	No, going on a coach, a big long coach, you know.  
MM:	It was the twentieth century.  She thinks you’re really, really old [all laugh].
BOT:	I often remember hearing of the charabanc and I didn’t know what she meant by that, it was a big long car or something.
MM:	Something like a very long bus?
COT:	Yes, yes.  You know, it brings them to bingo now.
BOT:	Oh that’s a coach, but you didn’t have coaches in those days.  It was a bus.
MM:	So, you went off on picnics anyway.
COT:	We used to go from work, once a year, that’s all.  To different parts of the country, you know.
MM:	And would your bosses go as well?
COT:	Oh the bosses would go and all, you’d go to a hotel and you’d get meals and all, you know.
MM:	And you were engaged at that stage?
BOT:	Were you going with Daddy then?
COT:	Well I really wasn’t, no [pause]
BOT:	She was going with somebody else.
MM:	You’re very discreet about it.
BOT:	Go on, you have to tell the story [laughs].
MM:	[Laughs] I want to hear about this.
BOT:	What was the man’s name that wanted to marry you and you wouldn’t?
COT:	Oh he was a Protestant.
MM:	Would your parents not have let you marry him or did you not want to yourself?
COT:	Oh no, his father left him pretty well fixed.
BOT:	What was his name?
COT:	He worked in a shop, drapers in Parliament Street.  
MM:	And how did you meet him?
COT:	I just met him [pause] I worked in Dollards and I used to meet him.  
BOT:	You worked around the corner from him.
COT:	I used to meet him the odd time.  But his father left him very comfortable.  He was an only boy and he had a shop, in Thomas Street, but then he went out on his own and worked in Sloans a clothing place and of course, I wouldn’t change my religion and he said well there’d be no use for us to be married because I wouldn’t change my religion either.  So that was the whole thing.
BOT:	So they parted.
COT:	Well, we had to part.  No, your father, Lord rest him, was after me at the same time and I used to go out with him and more so, than I’d go out with the other young man, the odd time, but there was a girl in work, I worked with, called Martha Carroll, and she’d say, well Connie, if I were you stay with Leo, because he’s your own religion and [pause].
MM:	And your religion was very important to you?
COT:	Well, it was, it was so. It was like, you know.  So I did, I let him go anyhow and I stayed with the one that I met.  They were all I was ever out with, like, you know.  And I used to visit his mother and things like that, his mother was alive then and we’d just go out an odd time, the pictures if we had money.
BOT:	Was Granny O’T. alive then when you were going with Daddy?
COT:	She died before we were married.
MM:	And was your husband religious as well?
COT:	Oh yes, he was very good.  Well you were that type those days.  You done your duties and all that. It’s different now, of course, the clergy has made it different.
MM:	Well, when your husband died did you find were the local priests helpful or was the Church helpful?
COT:	Not at all.  
BOT:	The main thing I remember about it, the night before, the night before my father died, I went to confession in the church and I was always remember the priest, I asked him for forgiveness for my sins and I asked him to forgive my father and he muttered some prayers then.  My father died on the Saturday night and the priest came down here and I always remember that, he was a lovely young man [pause]
MM:	Did you know [pause] when you were struggling to work and look after your kids, you were friendly with your neighbours?  Were there friends from work that you kept up with at all?
COT:	No, no.  And the neighbours are still the same neighbours here, as then.  And this woman here, she’s over 82 and her health is very bad.  And I used to, if I had something more than she would, I’d call in the eldest girl and I’d say, is your Mammy in, you know, Philomena, and she’d say no, she’s gone in to town and she’d be cleaning and all, the eldest girl, she had eight children, the eldest girl, she’d say she’d be trying to clean before Mammy comes back.  She’d say it to me.  So I’d come in and in those days, you’d get a box of cheese, and I’d have cream crackers, and I’d say, here Philomena go on in and make yourself a cup of tea and have a piece of cheese and some cream crackers.  She used to be starving.  But if I had anything I’d always give it in, and if I wanted anything from her I’d always ask her, you know that way.  But there wasn’t many neighbours, shifting around, there was a couple, always moving on and moving in, you know that kind of way.  
MM:	When you came here, you were the last to move in, what sort of people were here before you?  Young couples like yourselves?
COT:	No, this whole road was only after finishing being built, and this house and that house was the only two houses that were left.  So, the man got this house for my husband and she got that house.  He’s a very nice man, my husband was a very good friend of his, you know, and he knew the situation we were in for a house so we got this.  But everything turned out then all right, by degrees.  Ah yes, the neighbours were all right, we all pulled together.
MM:	So you just, you know that one of the things that struck me about the area around James’s Street and Kilmainham is how people knew each other for generations.  Was that true of here as well, do you think?
COT:	Well, not really, because they were all new around, you see, they all come from town, places that were condemned and they got those houses, with the result that we were all kind of strangers, you know, more or less, and people then didn’t mix, you didn’t mix very well.
MM:	The community spirit that helped you, do you think that’s gone?
COT:	Well, around here, it hasn’t changed.  It’s grand, there’s never a word.  Never a word, we’re very lucky to get here.  Because I think if we were living in a new area where there’d be trouble with people and noisy people, you know the way where there’s families fighting and arguing, I wouldn’t have stayed here, I’d have got out of it somewhere.  We were very lucky, you never hear a sound, it’s just like now, you’d never hear a thing.  Those people are very quiet and you know she had eight children and she was like myself, got it very tough, because her hubby wasn’t too good to her, you know, he was very hard on her.
MM:	In what way?
COT:	He was a man that didn’t want to give up any money.  He was a boot repairer, he had a shop, he hadn’t his own shop, but he worked across town and he used to repair shoes, and boots and all, you know, and he’d get extra work to do that would make him a few bob for himself but he wouldn’t give it to the wife, because he used to say she was a waster.  Now, I’d put on a pot of potatoes, and I’d mash them with butter and milk and I’d cream them, cut up a small onion, very fine and put it in, parsley and a bit of parsley, chop it all up and make a kind of a nice meal, like, fry a couple of rashers, a bit of black and white pudding and a few sausages or something.  But the way she was, I was always great at gardening, I was a great gardener; my son took those two photographs because I want to send them out to Australia.
(790 words removed relating to arrangements for tea) 
MM:	Were you sorry that your sons had to go to Australia, would you have preferred them to stay here?
COT:	Oh God, I was sorry they had to go.  I really was.
(261 words removed at interviewees’ request) 
COT:	But it’s changed too, it’s not the same.  It’s just like here, drugs, there’s drugs and everything everywhere, though they’re doing good here in catching a lot of them, aren’t they?
MM:	Why do you think that things have changed so much in Ireland?
COT:	Well, I’d say it’s the government’s fault.  They’re not taking enough of interest in the public, they don’t care once they’re right themselves.  That’s just the way it is; they should be tougher.  They’re not tough enough, because they shouldn’t allow the children, the boys and the girls, to carry on the way they do.  There’s one thing that I’d just say to whoever brought it out, should be shot, women having babies and the government keeping them up.  Unmarried mothers.  Now, up around the corner there there’s some girls and they have three and they’re not married, and the government paying all that money out.  Look at the amount of money they’re paying out, I think it’s disgraceful.  Because the mothers, their mothers are minding the kids while they’re out having a good time, once they give the mother a few bob out of whatever they get, the mother is all right.  They’re all around you, here.  And all through the scheme, young ones having babies, I think it’s terrible.
MM:	And is it, it’s mainly older women then who are looking after them?
COT:	The mothers will look after them, once they get a few quid, because they’re getting plenty of money.  But what I don’t understand is why the government doesn’t make the girls that have the first one, make the fellow who owns the child pay.
MM:	Well, they’re doing that in Britain.
COT:	Yeah, make them pay.  For the damage they done and they wouldn’t be having them as quick as, as often as they are.  And look at the upset of the divorce now, look at the poor kids are going to be upset now with this divorce.  I mean, the father leaves the wife and whether there’s three or four children, they might be kept up all right but, if she gets married to another man, those kids are not going to like that man.  They want to see their own father, they’re running back to see their own father.  Same thing with the mothers, they’ll be going back to see their own mother.  It won’t work out, it won’t work out at all.  
MM:	Did you ever get involved with politics at all over the years?
COT:	God, I wouldn’t be interested.  
MM:	Well, did you vote?
COT:	I’d vote, yes, I’d vote.  I’d vote for whichever I thought like would be going to do something, but sure they don’t do anything.
MM:	On the basis of local issues?
COT:	Sure you wouldn’t know who to put in or who to vote for, because things are changing all the time.  The government, they don’t do a whole lot.  Now, I remember when my husband died, really I was in a bad way, and I rang up Vincent de Paul and explained my position and a man came out, an awful lot of country men worked in it, the Vincent de Paul, he was a country man, and he came out and I told him the way I was fixed.  I told him about the children.  Ah, says he, sure my God, says he, well I hadn’t all the furniture and things I have now because the girl that went to Australia, Colleen, she gave me most of her stuff, you know, and he said sure you can sell this and you can sell that, he said I can’t do anything for you.  The most I could give you is a pound.  A pound!  Well, thank you very much, I said, keep it, you might want that for yourself.  
MM:	[Laughs].  How did he take that?
COT:	I could have hit him, sell your [pause] sell my home! I’ve a family, I said I have to have a home  [laughs]. [Betty re-enters from kitchen where she was making tea.] I’m telling her about Vincent de Paul, they’re the biggest chancers going and do you know what? They’re millionaires ten times over, because they’re left businesses, and they’re left property and they’re left people dying leaves them in their will, there’s no end to the money Vincent de Paul has.
MM:	And were there many people do you think that went to them for help?
COT:	Oh God, yes, there are, but they don’t give them the help.  The poor man up the road here, and he’s dead Lord have mercy on him, poor Mr. Fife, and a fellow came one day here, he was in a car, and he gave me a little bit of a cardboard box [pause] [Betty re-enters with tea and sandwiches.] But anyhow, what was I saying there now? They do help people now because they can afford to help them, there’s loads of money going to them now, loads of money into the Vincent de Paul.  They can afford to help people, but they could do better, you know.
MM:	Well did any of the women that you knew in Guinness’s, for instance, ever go to them?
COT:	Well they would, yes.  They might get something out of them and maybe they would and maybe they wouldn’t.   
Second interview 22nd January 1996
MM:	Now one of the things that I was interested in following up [pause] you know I was asking you all about your working life, the work you were paid to do [pause] what we didn’t go into very much was the work that you did at home, the work that you had to do but you didn’t get paid for.  So, you know, you were saying that you had to come home from Guinness’s early in the morning to get the kids out to school? What would your day be like?
COT:	Oh my day would be like, washing the children’s clothes and cleaning the house, cleaning the rooms, dusting and hoovering and do as much work as possible.
MM:	Yes.
COT:	For the next morning, to be ready for the next morning, you know. And have the children’s clothes ready for the next morning for school.  I’d have ironing to do and things like that, you know. 
MM:	So you had to do that on top of the work you were doing in Guinness’s?
COT:	Exactly.  If it was a wet day, I’d have to put a line up for to try and dry the clothes and light the gas and the heat to try and dry them, iron them with a hot iron, you know.  I had to do for Guinness’s, because I had the [pause] my nerves got the better of me and then I was at home and they gave me washing to do.
BOT:	Excuse me for interrupting.  Mary just wants to find out what you had to do because that’s all in this here now [indicating transcript of first interview].  She doesn’t want to go back over that.  She just wants to find out what you had to do when you came home from work.
COT:	Yes.  Well, I had to do all my own work here. Well, the eldest were good for giving the help. They’d go out and I’d give them a slip of paper to get me a few messages, save me from going out.  You know, I’d tell them what to get for me and [pause]
MM:	Did they go to the local shop?
COT:	Yeah, well, as local as could be.  It’s all changed now, like you know.  Years ago you could go in next door to get a quarter of butter or a pound of sugar, but there’s nothing like that now.  It’s all supermarkets now - you’d want a pile of money going in, you know. 
BOT:	Mary’s talking about then!  We had no supermarkets then.
COT:	No, that’s right.
BOT:	There was just a shop there, where you’d go [pause]
COT:	That’s it exactly. Now what I done [pause] clean up all the rooms and change the bedclothes and anything that had to be washed, throw them off to be washed.  And things like that.  And I had no washing machine, the washing all had to be done in the big sink bath, and a scrubbing board which I still have, for washing, which I still have and I’d do the clothes in that.
MM:	And how did you heat the water?  Was it coming from a tap or did you have to heat water in a kettle or something like that?
COT:	I’d have to heat the water.
MM:	So you were lifting pots of water as well.
COT:	Exactly. 
BOT:	Mammy, I’m turning off that television, because you’re looking at that and you’re not listening to what Mary’s saying to you.
MM:	[Laughs]. Well. I know nowadays we have lots of different washing powders and everything, what would you have used?
COT:	Well, Persil.  I think I used Persil or Rinso, they were the washing powders, them two.  
MM:	You’d dissolve that in the water?
COT:	I would, until I’d think there’d be enough for the clothes.  I’d rub them up and down, and leave them for a while to soak in, you know, and keeping putting in more hot water and rub up and down, like [laughs].
MM:	And would you wear rubber gloves?
COT:	Not at all.  I never used rubber gloves in my life [laughs].
MM:	That might have contributed to the arthritis?
COT:	No I wouldn’t say so, sure the arthritis is in my knees I’ve got it, in my knees [pause]
MM:	Of course.
COT:	I used to do a lot of gardening too.  I used to do a lot of gardening and I would be kneeling a lot, but my poor father, lord rest him, had a great big garden and if I had an hour or so to spare, I’d go down and give him a hand, for the stuff for the market for him, you know.  I suppose that had a lot to do with it, too.
MM:	Can I just ask you, to go back a bit, you were saying that he’d worked in Dollards and that you’d worked with him.  When did he move into the shop and the market garden end of things?
COT:	Oh, he was there all his life.
BOT:	They’d always had the garden.
MM:	While he was working in Dollards?
COT:	Oh yes.
MM:	So you were always a very hardworking family?
BOT:	Yes, even now, even my uncles, mammy’s brothers, she had two brothers, they worked in the shop and then, my uncle Peter he worked in it [pause] the shop they had, Peter stocked it out from the garden.
MM:	Right.
BOT:	And, my grandfather always had the garden, from the time he was younger he did it, although he worked in Dollards, he did that as well.
COT:	He’d get up at five o’clock in the morning and work until about half seven.  Then he’d be down to get his breakfast and get into Dollards at eight o’clock.
MM:	And then presumably when he finished in Dollards in the evening?
COT:	He’d be up there the whole evening, that’s like, when the weather would be better like, when the evenings got long, he’d have his dinner, he’d go up there after his tea and wouldn’t finish until dark.
MM:	When you went up to help him, what sort of things would you do?
COT:	I’d be putting down lettuce, young lettuce and that, rows of lettuce and I’d be pulling that and putting them into a place where they’d be growing bigger and the same with cabbage, cabbage plants, you know and they’d grow into big [pause] 
MM:	So you were doing it summer and winter?
COT:	Summer and winter, exactly.  There was only [pause] you see, I had four brothers [pause] I had seven brothers, they’re all dead, lord rest them.  I’m the only girl, there was no girls, all boys, and they all gave a hand at the work too.  We all worked hard at it.  When they came home they’d give a hand, you know.  They’re all dead and gone, now. 
MM:	Well, were you treated sort of like one of the boys in that you helped with the garden or were you expected to do help at home as well?
COT:	No, I wouldn’t, I’d be dying to get down to help my father because I knew it was hard work.  He was very strong, very good, never drank and just a pipe, he used to smoke a pipe but [pause] he’d never [pause] he was great.
MM:	What about your mother? Did she help out?
COT:	Oh my mother, lord love her, she had seven boys, I needn’t tell you she had [pause] and she’d be kept going cooking and everything else, shopping, she used to bake her own bread, she was a great cook, you know.  Sure, that’s the way, I suppose, with life, isn’t it?  They don’t do things like that now [pause] sure they don’t stay in even.
MM:	I can’t remember the last time my daughter helped out in the house [laughs].
BOT:	When I was about seven, my uncle Paddy got a shop and he was on the South Circular Road and he’d sell the vegetables from the garden.  I used to help out on every Saturday and I used to go with another cousin, Kathleen and myself used to go on a Saturday, and both of us went to deliver the vegetables to the houses and [pause] I spent a lot of my childhood in the market garden.
MM:	So you weren’t too much a city child?
BOT:	Oh no.
COT:	They weren’t allowed out to run around the way they are now [pause] 
BOT:	We got out a lot, we’d always go with someone [pause] (indecipherable sentence) [pause] my grandmother used to take us [pause]
COT:	Or out to Tallaght [pause] all those places have changed, you know.
MM:	I remember when I was a child, my aunt used to take me to visit people in Tallaght - it was a little village in the country then.
COT:	That’s right - there used to be cottages, little cottages.  It was much better, all those times were better.  It’s all money now, it’s no good, all money [pause] drugs, it’s all going on drugs.  
BOT:	Times were poorer, but I think they were better then.  
COT:	They were hard times.
MM:	Do you think people didn’t have such high expectations?
BOT:	They didn’t [pause]
COT:	The children weren’t ruined, the way they’re ruined now.
BOT:	I think that [pause] I think I can look back on a lovely childhood.  I mean, I think most of the children today can’t do that [pause]
MM:	Well, I notice myself [pause] I remember spending whole summers on Dollymount beach.  We cycled down and we just spent the day.  We played around in the sand and we went swimming [pause] but I couldn’t let my children do that [pause] you had to be with them all the time.
BOT:	Well that’s like my auntie Marie, she had no children [pause] and she used to bring us up to Howth.  We’d spend the whole day [pause] it was lovely.
COT:	And it was so cheap to go [pause]  you could go out.  
BOT:	The tram with no top on it, going up to the Head.
MM:	I was on the last one that went up to Howth, with my grandfather [laughs].
BOT:	Were you?  
COT:	I used to love that [pause] you could sit in the breeze.
BOT:	And the summers were beautiful, I think, it was better.
MM:	Do you think they actually were beautiful or is it because childhood was good for you that you remember it as being so?
BOT:	Well, you could be right there.  I know we didn’t have as much but we enjoyed ourselves.
COT:	Well, you got your wages from your work and you had to come home and hand it up the way you got it.  You might get two bob out of it.  That had to last you the week.
MM:	What would you do with the two bob?
COT:	Well you’d buy maybe a pair of stockings for sixpence in Crannick’s in Thomas Street.  Oh you wouldn’t get much, I’m telling you.
BOT:	One night’s pictures out of it, maybe.
COT:	We never went to the pictures, we never used to go anywhere, no pictures or dancing or anything like that.
BOT:	You must have gone to the odd dance when Daddy was alive?
COT:	But now I think they’ve ruined the country with those discos.  The children, the boys and girls out until all hours, that’s where they get the drugs [pause]
MM:	Do you think parents don’t know what their children are up to?
COT:	Parents now don’t seem to care.  They’d say to you, sure she’s eighteen, she’s old enough to know what she’s doing. Well, I wouldn’t say that, I’d still tell her what to do at eighteen.  I wouldn’t let her do it at eighteen.
MM:	I think it’s become harder because children are aware of their rights and they’ll tell you very quickly what they want to do.
(451 words removed relating to interviewer’s family)
MM:	Your children seem to have worked very hard; you were saying they helped you out with the washing.
COT:	Two and a half, the youngest, and Betty was the eldest, she was about ten.  And I’d no trouble, not five minutes trouble with them.  Whatever they were told to do, they’d do without answering you or anything.
BOT:	Sometimes reluctantly, but we’d do it just the same [laughs].
MM:	Well, do you think that was because you knew your Mam was on her own and she needed you?
BOT:	Well yes, I’d say it was.
COT:	They knew what I had to do, get up in the early morning, you can imagine the two boys, one was ten and one was eleven, there was only a year between those two, they used to get up in the morning and leave me half way nearly down to the job where I worked.
MM:	That’s very impressive, because they’d have to walk back again, wouldn’t they?
COT:	Yes, they would, they’d walk back, because they were afraid, it was so dark that someone would attack me or something would happen me.
MM:	Yes.
COT:	They were very good.  But sure, I think that’s the way to rear them, isn’t it?  Make them realise what life is all about.  What can you do? That’s the way it was.
MM:	Just to go back a little, you were saying that you would have to wash and iron the children’s clothes, to have them ready, did you make their clothes or did you buy them?
COT:	I’d buy them.  I’d buy what was in the sales, you know.  In Georges Street, there was Winstons in Georges Street, or Cassidys, they were great you know, all them cheap sales, you know, cheap and they’d get a long time out of them because they’d have to, sort of, you know what I mean?  I’d always keep them clean, wash them and have them ironed.
MM:	And would you be able to pass things on, one to the other, or did you try and get them new?
COT:	No, if they fitted them I would, or if I got [pause] maybe someone would give me something, you know.  The woman next door, maybe some of the kiddies would have grown out of them and she’d give them to me.  She’s dead, Lord rest her, she was very bad, she used to be dying of her kidneys [pause]
BOT:	My daddy’s sister, she [pause] after he died, she used to buy me things.  
COT:	She was her goddaughter.  She never married, like, you know and she was working.  She bought quite a lot of things.
MM:	Did the others mind that you were getting those extra things bought for you?
BOT:	Not really, I don’t think so.
MM:	Because she was your godmother it was okay?
BOT:	Yeah, that’s right.
MM:	And what sort of things would she have bought for you?
BOT:	Well, she bought me a coat [pause]
COT:	She’d buy the best things.  
BOT:	The coat was lovely.  She bought me, this is a very funny story [pause] she bought, she got a dress made for me for my confirmation, and my uncle Peter bought me a lovely coat and gloves and Mammy bought me shoes.  My auntie Margaret, she wanted to buy the dress as well, and Mammy didn’t know what to do about it, she didn’t want to hurt her feelings so she let her buy the dress.  And the one she bought was beautiful and the one my auntie Gertie bought, it was nice, it was white, really nice, but the one my auntie Marie bought was blue chiffon with all kinds of little flowers [pause]
MM:	And how old were you at this stage?
BOT:	I was, I think I was nine, nine or ten.
MM:	So the blue chiffon would have had a lot more appeal? [All laugh.]
BOT:	Yes, but anyway, on the day of the confirmation I wore my auntie Margaret’s dress.  My auntie Gertie wouldn’t [pause] she wouldn’t have seen me in the dress on the day I made my confirmation so the day after, the day I was going to visit her I wore her dress [all laugh].
MM:	Very diplomatic [laughs]
BOT:	And of course, I couldn’t let either of them see, Mammy couldn’t let either of them see the dresses the other one bought.
MM:	I take it they never got together, that they were likely to say what a lovely dress [pause]?
BOT:	Oh no, that’s right, they didn’t [pause] although they were sisters in law they never [pause]
COT:	They were never very great with one another.
BOT:	They didn’t talk to one another.  But they were two lovely ladies.
COT:	She was a German.
BOT:	My auntie married [pause] her name was Budweiser [pause] my daddy’s brother married her.
COT:	They were an old family.
BOT:	They were watchmakers in Dublin.  
MM:	Was she German-born herself?
BOT:	Yes, she was born in Germany and her father came here to live.  His wife, she was his third wife, was an Irish woman and they had a jeweller’s shop in Aungier Street.  It’s called Green’s now, I don’t know if it’s still there.  Well, that was their jeweller’s’ shop, Green’s, and they lived above the shop, with her father, and she had one sister and she had stepsisters and brothers from his other marriage.
MM:	And did she ever have problems during the war because she was German?
BOT:	No, not here, funny enough, not that I remember anyway.
COT:	No, never.
BOT:	Because they lived on the South Circular Road when they got married first, and then they got a house over here opposite the Royal Hospital and they lived there until she was 92, when she died.
MM:	That’s a great age, isn’t it?
COT:	People are living longer now, because they seem to get more food and all like, making a difference.  Years ago people couldn’t afford big meals [pause]
BOT:	Although my grandfather was, he died in 1954, and he was 95.
COT:	There’s not many worked as hard as he did.  He worked very hard.
MM:	He seemed to have a very healthy diet, with all the vegetables [pause]
COT:	Yeah, that helped a lot, it really did. 
MM:	Would you have eaten much meat?
COT:	No, no, even now I don’t like meat.  
BOT:	Well, we, the family did, but Mammy was never a great meat eater.
MM:	Well, I must say I’m not myself.
BOT:	Well, in those days the meat was different.  Now a lot of people would buy ribs and [pause] although, I often buy ribs here now because I like them and maybe pig’s feet or [pause] you know that kind of thing, that kind of meat.  You’d get some pig’s trotters on a Saturday night and have them for supper [laughs].
MM:	And what about [pause] for protein, did you have plenty of vegetables, eggs or cheese maybe?
BOT:	Oh yes, I remember as a child I used to take a bucket and, there was a little farm up the road from us here, and the man actually, there was a brother and two sisters who ran the farm and I used to go up there for the milk and I’d get a pint of buttermilk and buy eggs.  I did that for years.
MM:	Were there no deliveries?
BOT:	Not at that time.  Well, I’d say, going into the fifties I think, they might have started then.
MM:	And what about buying bread, would you have made your own, or would you buy it from the baker?
COT:	I used to bake a lot of bread.
BOT:	Well, we had a baker, we had Johnston Mooneys [pause].
COT:	Johnston Mooney [pause] he’d come every day.  I used to bake bread myself, white and brown.
BOT:	She made nice soda bread. White soda bread.
MM:	And brown bread?
BOT:	She’d make brown cakes. 
MM:	What about your mother’s griddle cakes? Did you ever do those?
COT:	I never had kind of a way of doing the griddle cakes.  At the fire, we had the range [pause] it’s a certain kind of fire you need for that. 
BOT:	She’d put them in the pan first, and then she’d put them on the top of the stove and brown the sides. 
BOT:	I was here last week [pause] I never bother buying liver much, but my sister comes here every Thursday and I had it then for her [pause] and whatever happened, it brought back a memory from when I was a child and Mammy used to make it for me and I could really taste the liver [pause] 
MM:	It’s incredible the way a scent or a taste like that can bring back a memory that you thought was completely lost.
COT:	They say you should eat liver once a week.
BOT:	I really thought that, I really enjoyed that bit of liver.
MM:	Was that because it brought back the memory of your childhood?
BOT:	Well, I think so, because I could actually get the same taste. 
MM:	My mother was a great believer in liver and other things that would build up my iron, and I used to hide it rather than eat it.  I never liked meat [all laugh].
(60 words removed – general conversation)
MM:	Anyway [pause] when you were having the babies, you were having them one after the other, nearly one a year.  What did you do for baby clothes? Did you knit things?
COT:	Well, I [pause] well, they were very cheap then, you know, and then you’d have one thing that belonged to the others that were after growing out of them.  You’d have a pile of small things, you know, that the other children would be growing out of them. 
MM:	I presume you had the towelling nappies in those days, as well.
COT:	Yes. You’d have to tear up old clothes, and square them out and stitch them and make nappies out of them. 
MM:	You’d have to boil them then?
COT:	It’s different now, look at the way they have them now. These disposables, throwing them out, throwing out and throwing out.  The disposables, they’re very handy but you need money for them.   They’re very expensive, you know.
BOT:	Although the towelling nappies were dear at that time.
COT:	They were, but you’d get a lot of wear out of them. You could wash them for years, for God’s sake.
MM:	But it was a lot of work?
COT:	Oh yeah, but you didn’t mind.  When you wouldn’t have the money to buy them you’d have to try and dry them, on a horse, a wooden horse and put them round the fire, you know. And they’d dry overnight, you know, by the fire.  You’d have to be careful, of course, and they’d dry overnight.  But you’d have to have your wits about you. I don’t know how the fires now are happening, with the people [pause]
BOT:	The small house that we lived in, it had a grate, an open fire in it, and it had two little hobs on the side and Mammy used to put the clothes around them to dry. And make her porridge on one of the hobs. 
COT:	I always made them porridge for breakfast.  Porridge is great.  I still have to have my porridge; I make it every morning.
MM:	My mother was a great believer in all these things but she could never get me to eat them [all laugh].
BOT:	Funny, isn’t it?
COT:	Well now, the mothers, I don’t know, they really kill me.  They go into the supermarkets and they might have two or three or four kids with them, and one kid [pause] they wouldn’t ask the mother, they’d walk over to the shelf and pick out the packet that he’d want, cornflakes [pause]
BOT:	Oh yes, they get what they want themselves. 
COT:	And the other fellow would say, I don’t want them and he’d pick out what he wants.  The mothers are crazy now, they really are. So they give them [pause] instead of having the one packet, they all have their own.  Sure that’s the way it is. 
MM:	Well I suppose there is more choice so people will want the variety.
COT:	Terrible, all those drugs, they’re desperate aren’t they?  Oh my God tonight, this country is reeking with them, reeking with them and the other crowd making an awful lot of money at it. 
MM:	When your children were growing up, were there ever children around who maybe started drinking or something like that?
COT:	Oh God, no fear. 
MM:	I know your own didn’t but would you have been aware of maybe neighbours’ kids that had problems?
COT:	No, no, never. It wasn’t the thing at all. You’d never see that in the houses, anywhere.  All the mothers kept them really well under control, you know.  
MM:	Do you think it was the mothers, rather than the fathers, who were in charge?
COT:	Well, the mother was always there with them more or less.  The fathers were for asking [pause] you’d say you’d better talk to him if they wanted something, this or that, he’d get it coming home.  You know what I mean? The men were good then.
MM:	Did you find it was a problem for you not having somebody coming in the evening that you could hold over the children?
COT:	No, they were good; even after their father died, they were no trouble.  I never let them run around the roads, or let them out.  When they came in they did their lessons and things like that and they’d have to do bits of things.  
BOT:	We had each other.
COT:	Exactly, yes [laughs].  You couldn’t be that way with a family, I can tell you.  Oh God, I couldn’t rear someone.  When I see the way they’re going round here, singing and going home at all hours, we’d be asleep in bed and they’d be going home singing, drunk and everything because the pubs are all around, you know, and they take a short cut down here to that place down there, the flats, what do you call them, Fatima Mansions.  And of course, there’s a lot going on down there, you know.
MM:	Does that ever worry you?
COT:	Ah no, never, never.  You’d be home in your bed and lock your door and that was that.  
BOT:	I really think, I don’t care what anybody says - they should do the same thing to them and let them feel what it’s like to be hurt.  I honestly do, it’s terrible what they get away with.  I was reading an article in the paper the other day about a youngster, he was sentenced to four years in jail and the judge sentenced him and they brought him to Lachan House or somewhere and they told him when they brought him there they can’t him in, that they’d no room and he’s actually back on the streets.  It’s awful.
COT:	I heard there last week that a fellow got two weeks for cutting a girl with a knife.  Two weeks in prison!  No, two years I mean and the girl died anyhow.
MM:	Have you any idea, I know you were saying earlier that it’s too easy, but why it is that things have changed?
COT:	Because there’s too much;  there’s too many young people now.  I mean there is an awful lot [pause].
BOT:	I know there aren’t many jobs and when young people come out of school, but what did we do years ago?
MM:	Well that’s why I’m interested because in terms of unemployment, the war years were very bad.
BOT:	Yes, I mean the fifties, it was terrible, there was no work for anybody and I think the drugs and the drinking, it’s just all an excuse.  Quite honestly, they have far too much now.
MM:	Would there be any point where you could see a particular shift?  I remember the sixties the way you remember the forties and things certainly seem to have gotten much worse since then?
COT:	I think television has ruined an awful lot.  Television really has destroyed everything.
MM:	Why is that?
COT:	Because there are things shown on television that shouldn’t be shown.  I mean they show boys and girls, even young boys, very young [pause].
BOT:	You don’t even have to look at television; you can just pick up the newspaper.
COT:	But they’re looking at these things, and the expressions, the four letter words out of some of their mouths, I think it’s disgusting.  The television.
BOT:	I was listening to some young people the other day and the whole lot they were saying was four letter words.  Every five minutes they were using the four letter words.
COT:	And beating up girls and beating up women and children, everything.  There’s things on television shouldn’t be shown.  They’ll tell you that they’re only shown at the certain time but they shouldn’t be on it in the first place.  Parents are out and leave the kids there.  They don’t care what they’re at.  You see the thing is now, there’s an awful lot of women drinking now, an awful lot of women with young children drinking and at the weekend, they have their pals and their husbands go out with their pals and the kids can do what they like.
BOT:	I think they have too much  - young children.  For instance, I have a friend, she worked with me and she has two children.  She’s separated from her husband and she spent a fortune on her kids for Christmas and when she came in after the holiday, we were asking about it, and she said when I think of what I spent on them, they got more pleasure out of the cardboard boxes.  I said to her well Maria aren’t you a stupid woman to go and spend all that because she’d spent money she didn’t really have, and she said they really wanted the things.
MM:	And how old were these children?
BOT:	One was four and the other was five, or three and five.
COT:	They didn’t know what anything was.
MM:	At four and five, where do you think they got the idea they wanted these things?  
BOT:	Oh from television.  Or maybe from being in the shops where they could see them, I don’t really know.  I know mothers who go into debt at Christmas.  I don’t think [pause] surely you can sit down and explain to them that you can either have one thing or the other but you can’t have both.  
COT:	That Vincent de Paul now, and different places like that, they’re handing out money.  They’re handing out money at Christmas to people who have spent it on the children, buying big presents for them to be as good as the kids next door.  You know that kind of way, the kid next door has a lovely bike and that woman is going to beg and she’s going to try and have as good as that child.  That’s the whole problem.
MM:	Do you think people are more embarrassed by being poor than they used to be?
BOT:	No I don’t, I think they just want to be better than the next person.  I don’t think that they’re embarrassed about it.
COT:	They’re not embarrassed at all. They get themselves into debt, there’s no doubt about that.  A fortune, this Christmas there was a fortune spent on children.  This was the biggest Christmas of all.
MM:	Could that be anything to do with the generation now having small children being a product of television themselves?
BOT:	Yeah, definitely.  They were brought up in that.  Like I’ve heard parents today talking and like, I’d like to give them something better than I had, we never had that when we were children, and to me that’s a guilt complex, I mean I don’t think a parent should think that if they haven’t got it that they should go into debt to try and do better for their child.
COT:	I think the telly is terrible.
MM:	I suppose it comes back to the question of contentment - you had a very happy childhood, you have no regrets about it?
COT:	You see, a mother must be in the home; you must be always in the home with young children.  I was always in the home, I never went out and got anything out of life but I was satisfied.  I never had a holiday.
MM:	How would you feel about the father staying at home and the mother going out to work so long as a parent was with the children?
COT:	Well I think the mother should, if the father is earning enough, if he’s getting enough, he should try and manage and get more and let the mother look after the home and the children.
BOT:	Well some fathers are very good at looking after their children.
MM:	I know some people where the mothers are earning more so it makes sense for the father to be the person at home but it would be nice if they could both enjoy their children if they wanted to.
MM:	Do you think that women are better at looking after children?
COT:	Well, I’ll tell you, I think women, now I think they’re very rude, even with their husbands. [Betty laughs loudly.]  You’ll see that yourself, you know what I mean.  
BOT:	She thinks they have no respect for their husbands.
COT:	I don’t think they have much respect for a man that’s good and he’d be working.
MM:	Well what about a man who didn’t?
COT:	Oh well, he’d have to be treated differently [all laugh].
BOT:	It’s funny, my mother, she’ll always stick up for the men.
COT:	Yes, the man, if he’s good.
MM:	Is that the way you were brought up to think or is it because you had six brothers?
COT:	I think that’s because we were brought up that way.  I think it’s the way, you know what I mean, if you were brought up right, and in your own married life.
MM:	My mother in law would share your opinion - she’s 82.  Although she’s very fond of her grand-daughters, she always favours the grandsons.  
BOT:	Mammy’s the same.  Once a man comes in the door first put the kettle on and make him a cup of tea and give him a dinner [laughs].
COT:	I think they should be treated better.
MM:	Why?
COT:	A man comes home and their dinner wouldn’t be on the table.  Now I love the men when they come in from work, to have their dinner ready for them because a man looks forward to that when he comes home, and has his dinner, and everything is right.  He can get home and there’s no sign of food, it’s the children they’re seating.
MM:	And you think that the father should be put before the children?
COT:	Oh yes, by all means.  I’m not saying now that you’d neglect the children but the fathers come first and the children after, second.
MM:	You wouldn’t approve of my house then at all, because when I come home from work my son has my dinner ready for me.  He’s a much better cook than I am [all laugh].
COT:	Well he’s not spoiled, that’s the proof of it, he has to make do with what he gets.  That’s the way it is.
MM:	I’ve read a lot of women, not recently, but in the period that we’re talking about, where if there was a shortage of money in the household they’d feed their husbands and feed their children and whatever was left, they would have.  You probably agree with that?
COT:	I would, yes.
BOT:	My mother does the same thing still, Mary.  The other evening my brother came in, on his way home from work.  I’d just fried a rasher for her and he was sitting here and she insisted he took it even though he didn’t want it.
MM:	Would you have been insulted if he didn’t take it?
COT:	No, he said I’m going home but you know the way you’d feel when you see them, because men are always hungry.  Men love food [Betty and Mary laugh very loudly], men love food.
MM:	I was intrigued when you were talking about your family having the enormous garden, and doing market gardening.  Were they Dubliners originally?
COT:	Oh yes, all from Dublin.  That’d be just on a Saturday now.
BOT:	Well Mammy’s family was from Inchicore and grandfather, his father was a Welshman, and I don’t know how they arrived in Dublin [pause] you don’t know that story do you? [To COT].  You don’t know how they met?
COT:	Well, he was Irish.
BOT:	No your father’s father, my grandfather was a Welshman.  
COT:	Oh yes.  Well, I don’t know, I suppose he had to meet somebody here.
(412 words removed in general conversation about interviewees’ grandparents)
MM:	Your daily life at home, what was your routine like after coming home from work?
COT:	My daily life at home? Well I’d do all my own work that I’d have to do.  When I wasn’t out working I’d have to be here doing the stuff, I’d just pull up my stockings and get stuck in here.
MM:	You must have put in a very long day - you started very early?
COT:	I never used to worry. Thank God I was always healthy, I never got colds or anything.  You know, I’d be always wanting to work and work and work, and wash and clean and scrub and polish; I’d polish this floor now, the oilcloth that was on this floor that was there.  I’d kneel down and I’d polish that oilcloth, you could see your face in it.  You know what I mean; I wouldn’t do it now.  
MM:	Did you have any labour saving devices to do all this work?  You didn’t have a washing machine did you?
COT:	No.
BOT:	We didn’t get our first washing machine until 1959 and that had a wringer on the side.  Actually, it was a sink unit and a cabinet with a washing machine and a little mangle on the top.  That was in 1959 when we got that and it was very good, it was a great washing machine.  And we got a hoover [pause].
MM:	That would be one of the upright hoovers?
BOT:	No, it was what do you call it, an Electrolux, you’d pull it along.
MM:	Would the iron have been an electric one?
BOT:	Yes.  Well, in the beginning Mammy used to use a gas iron.
COT:	I used to use a gas iron.
MM:	How did that work?
COT:	All right.  You’d fill it up with gas and you’d have a little silver shield to put it into when you were ironing.
MM:	I remember seeing in old films when a woman would be ironing she’d spit on the thing and I always wondered why you did that.
BOT:	That was just to test it, if it sizzled it was hot enough [laughs].
BOT:	Before the gas iron, we had one, we had an open fire down there and we’d put it on the little hob to heat it.
MM:	And was an open fire a problem with young children?
COT:	We had a guard on it.  You’d have to watch.  Some people are careless but I was always very particular, you’d have to be of course when you’d young children.
MM:	Betty, you were saying that during the war years you remember pushing a pram to collect the turf, was that something that you shared among you?
BOT:	Well maybe Maureen might come with me one day or John and Paddy would go the next day, that way we shared.
MM:	The cleaning out the fire, did you that?
COT:	The boys, they’d clean the fire for me sometimes.
MM:	Would you have to do that before you set off for work?
COT:	No, you wouldn’t have time, really.  At any rate it would be too dangerous to leave it on, you know.
MM:	So when you all got up in the morning then, it would be quite cold in the winter?  
BOT:	Well, when Mammy was working I used to get up.  Mammy would be gone about half past five and I’d get them up for nine o’clock.
MM:	What time did you have to be in for school?
BOT:	Ten o’clock and we’d be home at half past twelve. 
MM:	And you all came home for your lunch?
BOT:	Yes. We’d go back then from quarter past one until four o’clock.  We’d have our dinner then when we’d come home.
MM:	And would you help each other with homework?
BOT:	No, my brains were limited [laughs].  But Maureen, my next sister and my brothers, they were very good at school.  Although I didn’t go to school all that long, I just wanted to work.  I left school at fourteen.  Sorry, I left school at fifteen and I was working then.
MM:	Right, well, did it change very much for you when Betty started working after school?
COT: Well, it did, well I had Maureen of course; I had the other girl.
MM: How old was she at that stage?
COT: Maureen, how old was she?
BOT: Well, when I started work, my wages was fourteen bob a week, for the whole week I got fourteen bob.  Well, it was around that, because I went to work in 1944.  I was fifteen and [laughs] well, I left on the Friday, I couldn’t stick it.  I don’t remember my wages but they wouldn’t have been much.  My grandmother had died and [pause] she decided to go back to England with her parents and I went to live with my grandfather and then it got too hectic for me, I wanted to leave.  I had a shop to look after and two, three men and a house and I was only fifteen.  So I decided that I wanted to go back home and my aunt, she got me a job in Henry Street.  I was working, then my brother went away, I was the only at home who was working for a few years, because my brother John, he was next to me, he went to Australia and then my brother Paddy, he was working here.  Paddy and I were working and Maureen finished school.
MM: When you started work, did you bring home your money to your mother?
BOT: Yes, I handed my mother my wages the way I got them and [pause] when I was twenty four, my wages were £4 [pause] the pay was £4.50 but I handed it to her and got the 50p back.  We all did that and then the money would be given back to us if we needed anything.  But after a few years, I started keeping the money and gave Mammy housekeeping.
MM: And how did that go down with her?
BOT: [Laughs] it didn’t go down well at all.  I dressed myself out of what I had then, this was when I was about twenty eight [pause]
COT: Well she bought things for herself, clothes and that [pause] Maureen worked in a jewellers in Grafton Street.  It was O’Connell’s Jewellers in Grafton Street [pause].
BOT: She went there to work and then Tommy was working in the Dublin Wholesalers in Abbey Street [pause] he was about sixteen or seventeen [pause].
BOT: Well she always bought their clothes for them.
COT: Even my son that’s married that has five children, William, he has a good job, where is he? Yeah, well he was; he was very good, looking after me.  I even went with him to buy his wedding clothes, in O’Connell Street.  I always went with them when they were buying their clothes.
BOT: I was thirty-two when I went for the job in Lyons and Mammy came with me.
COT: I used to go with them everywhere.
BOT: She always used to come [pause] even the first job I ever got and my friend was with me, and Mammy got both of us jobs on the same day, and Mammy was with us.
MM: When you say that you got the job, did you do the talking at the interview as well?
COT: Well, more or less.
BOT: We were probably afraid to say anything, you know [laughs].  But the job in Lyons, I didn’t talk myself, she just told them I would be suitable [laughs].
MM: Did it get to the stage that you helped decide how the household budget would be spent?
BOT: Oh no, Mammy always [pause] I never interfered with Mammy over, regards spending money on the house.  She bought what she wanted and the money I gave her, I would buy an odd thing for the house or I’d save for something [pause]. But I was never a person for spending a lot of money on clothes [pause].
COT: Well the lads would do this, they’d do the garden, they’d cut the hedge and everything you know.
BOT: Well it was a case that you got so used to doing it, it was a regular thing every week; we did our own chores.   It was funny when Maureen and I were here, we used to have more rows.  I’d be ready to do one part of the house and Maureen was to do the other, but I decided I’d do upstairs but Maureen was determined.
MM: But it never occurred to you to just down tools.
BOT: No, funny enough, it never did.
COT: I was very strict and I never let them out around. They weren’t out around.
BOT: Well, it wasn’t that you were strict, it was just that we automatically did things, if we didn’t do it, she’d have to do it so we were taking her part.
MM: You said you had a friend at the interview with you [pause] did you make friends at work?
BOT: We were school friends [pause] we’re still friends actually, although I don’t see her now so much.  But we’re still friends as much as we were when we were only fourteen years old.
MM: And did she come to the house?
BOT: Oh yes, she’d be invited for tea, or for Sunday dinner, you know.
MM: And what about boyfriends?
BOT: Oh yeah, quite a few, well Maureen always had more than I had [pause] she always had the pick of them.  And did you vet them?
COT: They were all welcome, welcome to the house.
BOT: She’d be talking to them, making sure they were all right.  As I say, it was Maureen mostly [pause].
COT: She went to Spain; she went to Spain to work. She had a grand job in Spain but she got sick and she came home and she met her husband.  He was right to her and all.  She used to do language [pause].
BOT: No English.
COT: She was very clever at school, Maureen, very clever.  
BOT: Now if she heard me saying a word wrong, she’d have to let you know.
MM: And would she do this in a pleasant way?
BOT: Well, she’d sit there and she’d look at you, and you’d know, you’d know you’d said the word wrong, you know.  Oh no, she can be very [pause] I told her off here, I told her off one evening.  We were up in her house and my cousin was home from America and Maureen said to me: Do you realise what you’re after saying? I said yes, but don’t you dare pull me up on it.  At times I have let her away with it, but I was annoyed that night and when we were in the kitchen, I said you shouldn’t say that to me [pause] she is, she can be a bit overpowering at times. Well now, Maureen, she would never interfere in the things that you’d do, but that is one thing that annoys me about her [pause].  I don’t know, she can be a bit standoffish at times, you know.  Well my aunt, she never married, but everything she did had to be perfect, even in her dress, her speech, she was always perfect.
COT: She used to be called the best-dressed lady in town, wasn’t she?
BOT: She was a bookie’s clerk in a very old-established place.
MM: Was that a common job for a woman?
BOT: No, not at that time.  The man that owned the shop, she was a clerk and they were opening the shop and she got the job [pause].  She was a very intelligent lady, she was. 
COT: Maureen was like that; Maureen was very intelligent.
BOT: Although Maureen now, Maureen could speak Spanish fluently [pause] if she puts her mind to do anything, she does it.  She’s done those two paintings there on the wall behind you.  She only started painting; she started about five years ago.  But no matter what she puts her mind to she’ll do it [pause]. I know I haven’t got the brain to do what she does.

Catherine and Betty Interviews, 24th October 1995 and 22nd January 1996

C&BOT1

