Colette, Dublin. Interview: 30th October 1997

CR:   My full name, the one that is on my registration, is Frances Marie Colette.  I just call myself Colette.  I’ve always been called Colette.
MM:   Is that because you prefer the name?
CR:	No, that is what my mother and father called me.  I don’t know where the Frances came from.  But my official documents, now, and anyone seeing my name there, I would always be referred to as Frances and I found it very hard to adjust to being called Frances [laughs].
MM:	Yes and are you a Dubliner?
CR:	Yes, I was born in Dublin and my parents were Dubliners with, I think, perhaps semi County Wexford/County Dublin connections.  I was never quite sure about that.
MM:	And when was that? When were you born?
CR:	I was born in 1919, in the autumn of 1919.  My mother was staying out in Bray at the time, on a little holiday, and my father was either away or maybe on night duty because my mother was in a bit of a panic when she was taken short [laughs] unexpectedly, and I gather it was pretty difficult at that time to get transport into the city.  I was born in the Rotunda, which I’m very proud of, I think it gives me a real Dublin heart.
MM:	I was born there too and my whole family, my mother before me.
CR:	Oh good, good.  Well, my mother wouldn’t have gone anywhere [pause] they were, my mother lived on the North side and my father lived on the south side.  He was a Liberties man, really, he lived on the old South Circular Road.
MM:	Right.  And did you have brothers and sisters?
CR:	I have one brother, one brother yes.  Do you want to know about him?
MM:	Well, not for the moment.  Can you go on and tell me about yourself?
CR:	Well, he’s quite well known. My father was educated in Synge Street.  He had brains - I don’t know where he got them really, his family I suppose but I don’t know too much about them, I don’t think my mother like them terribly [pause] and my earliest recollections are of standing on the kitchen table in the basement of their house and hearing some sort of row going on with the brothers.  They were a very mixed family, my father I think was the eldest, but the others were [pause] there was one of them a Free Stater and another was a Sinn Féiner.  I discovered recently, quite recently, through my brother through somebody who was claiming cousinship; that the other one was in the British Army, so I think that was the reason for the distance. 
MM:	And would your mother have had strong nationalist views?
CR:	My mother had vacillated.  She was an extraordinary woman.  She was extremely volatile; she hated the British [pause] when I was very young she had a stillborn baby and she never forgave them, it was in England.  It was their fault of course [laughs].  She had a few friends; they were people with whom they stayed when they were there.  My father was working for the government but I’m not sure of the details.  It’s all terribly nebulous.  They never talked about themselves, to that extent.  He never talked about his work.  I think he was reticent because he felt too much in [pause].
MM:	Was he a civil servant?
CR:	No he wasn’t, but he was very much involved in the political campaigning of the time.  You’ll appreciate that Home Rule was being pressed forward and then the war came and all the business of the Redmondites going out and [pause] I’m terribly vague about it but I know that he was, he was very much involved in because he was secretary to a parliamentary [pause] a member of parliament.  That’s all extremely mysterious because we don’t know why he stopped being a secretary.  I think my mother probably had something to do with it, she just doesn’t didn’t like him being away, and there was an awful lot of coming and going and toing and froing involved and knowing her, she wanted him close by [pause] and, well, we often say it’s a pity he didn’t talk to us more, because he could have told us a tremendous amount about the facts, the facts of what happened with the Redmondites.  He did talk to my next-door neighbour, because she said there were one or two copybooks full of stuff that he told her, she used to come and visit him.  But unfortunately, she died and I never heard; I never got any details of it.  The odd thing he would say now and again, which was surprising, but never - my brother might know a bit more but I don’t know.  It was always a great mystery; we’d love to have known a bit more.
MM:	So do you remember as a child, as a child were you conscious of the fact that you weren’t being told or was that something as you grew up?
CR:	Oh not at all.  In those days, children were just belted around the place if you said the wrong thing.  There was always some sort of a trauma going on, I mean I was aware of anxiety.  My mother was an extremely highly strung woman.  She developed, she had very bad health at about the time I was around four or five, she really did suffer.  You know the older I get the more I realise how much she suffered.  But she was a difficult woman to live with [laughs] and I got the brunt of it, very much so.  Very volatile. She should have been an actress, or she should have been [pause] she had tremendous, she had great personality but she fought with everybody.  She had very strong opinions about everything and other people didn’t have any of those opinions.
MM:	Did that influence you?
CR:	I never uttered, believe it or not, I never uttered until I was about thirty.  No matter what you’d say she’d just have to contradict it.  She had to stay in a lot because she was very bad.  She had very bad ulcerated legs and she had very bad arthritis and she had very, very bad health really.  But, the result was that she wasn’t out very much and as a gregarious person, it must have been hell.  Well anyway, she’d mull over everything you’d say and you’d have it brought up about three weeks later [laughs].
MM:	And where did you go to school?
CR:	I went to school in the St. Louis Convent in Rathmines.  I was one of their earliest pupils there; they started the school in the 1920s.  I can’t remember the exact date but I know it had only been open a few years.  It was a great place, small, very small, and now it’s vast.  But then I was always a loner in so far as, we lived in Ranelagh, and most of the school, most of the pupils came from Rathgar, Rathmines, Harold’s Cross, like there was one, there were two came from the South Circular Road.  I was at right angles, everybody else was on this side and I was away from the others.  There were only two others didn’t come the Rathmines area.  I really should have gone to Muckross, which would have been only down the road from us.  I don’t quite know why I didn’t.  One of my mother and father’s contacts used to sing in the church choir and their daughter was going to St. Louis - that may have been it.
MM:	Was that where you started your musical studies?
CR:	I didn’t really, that was an extra, and we couldn’t afford extras.  We had very good music teachers - Sister Clothilde, she only died about two years ago.  She was a marvel; she had a very good choir.  She trained us and we did quite well at singing.  We went to a Grade A school in 1930 or 32 which meant we were taught all in Irish.  We went enthusiastically in the Dublin Feis and the Feis Maitiú.  We had a very good choir; we had an excellent choir in fact.  We also had an excellent orchestra.  I remember going to an audition and being told to hold out your arm and see how long it was and I was given a viola to play.  Now, I was about eleven at the time. [Both laugh.]  I started to learn music at home when I was about nine, on the violin.  There was a lady who lived in Upper Beechwood Road, she was one of the genteel poor and she had been a pupil of Senior Esposito [pause] and she was quite elderly.  She really was because she died before I was finished being taught by her.  She lived with her brother and sister in law in a Victorian house.  It was a terraced house, but it was a Victorian cottage, it was called.  She was very good; she was a very good teacher.  She wore black, all black, I don’t know if it was bombazine [laughs] but it was always black and they had a very strange piano, it was like tortoiseshell, I don’t know if it was tortoiseshell but it had a pattern, a fretwork kind of pattern on the front and pleated green silk on the back and it was lit up by candles.  She was a very good teacher.  I did that and then the school music was the choir and later the orchestra.  I think it was one of the first that was set up, Loreto had one too.  It was quite interesting, whenever the examination came up - we were good enough to have an examination - Mr. O’Reilly, from the College of Music in Chatham Street, came to see us.  We used to do quite well really.  Rathmines was a very good school, I must admit I always felt that about the place.  They had tremendous educational focus, they always concentrated on education.
MM:	What sort of subjects would you have done?
CR:	We did everything, Irish, English [pause] my father said I should do a bit of Latin when I was in my fifth year.  We did Science, which was rather basic.
MM:	It was unusual for a girls’ school to do Science at that time?
CR:	Well, we had a science lab and we were taught it in Irish so let me tell you I have no recollection whatsoever. [Both laugh]  And we did French and Home Economics, it was called Domestic Science then.  Oh and Music.  It was a good range, a good all round range. 
MM:	Would the girls have been prepared to go on to university from your class?
CR:	Oh yes, they were.  A few had gone ahead of us, in my time, now I finished in 1937 and before that there would have been [pause] I know that in the year I left quite a few went in to College.  I would like to have gone but I had no idea what I wanted to do.  In those days there was no such thing as career guidance or counselling, we were being educated for matrimony or the civil service.
MM:	Did neither appeal to you at the time?
CR:	Well no, I just lived.  I just lived from day to day, I had really no great thoughts of life - and there was always an atmosphere of anxiety at home so that I really just hoped that I would get something to do that I would be able to pay my way and contribute to the household.  But no, I didn’t, I recall one of my classmates, who hadn’t come right through - she had come in [pause] there were a few girls who came in, they were sort of in their teens, who had gone to other schools before who came in to be prepared for College and they did very well.  There were a few well known names, of the female population, very well known names, who had been ahead of me.  In fact, I saw the other day, a programme, or play or something, and Petronella O’Flanagan’s name was associated with it.  Petronella O’Flanagan was about, I’d say about three years ahead of me, it’s difficult to know when you’re a youngster how much ahead, another one who was ahead of us was Bernadette Plunkett, who was one of the first broadcasters in radio, one of the news readers, she played in Trilby,  in the 1930s and she was remarkably good.  She had great French, and she was sort of the Head Girl then and I remember getting up the courage to go to her one day and say that she was very good [laughs].  
(82 words removed at request of interviewee)
CR:  No, after I left school, I learned shorthand and typing and secretarial skills.  I went to the University Tutorial Institute, which was in Harcourt Street and I went there for two years, on and off.  We did all the government examinations, and the ESB and the Corporation, and so forth.   It had quite an interesting cross section.  I met a few people there who became very good friends for years and years and some interesting people.  Seamus Ennis was in the class.  His sister had been in my school so that I felt on nodding terms.
MM:	So it wasn’t just women then who were taking the course?
CR:	No, no it was a college, just like the colleges that are there now.  Oh no, in fact one of the classmates he went on, I think he ended up a brigadier general or something in the army.  And of course, the Darragh boys were there.  The Darraghs were two brothers, one of them was a brilliant teacher, brilliant, and he taught in the Institute and of course, they had other teachers who came in to do particular subjects, they were very good.
MM:	What subjects would you have been doing?
CR:	Well, you did English and Irish, and you learned shorthand and typing.  The shorthand was difficult, well you got into it eventually, the typing was an exercise, it was quite an effort.  We had, I remember one time, we had a lady who taught us, I remember her name but I don’t remember what happened her eventually.  She set us up, we all had our instruments, box typing it was called, and she’d set up a gramophone and we’d type to tunes [pause] I can never hear the Liberty Belle or one those tunes that go da dee da dee da dee without going to A B L E [pause] [laughs].  It was an interesting way of learning typing.  I was a good typist because my father was an excellent one and to me, typing meant going quickly, so I couldn’t understand [pause] just making a sound every ten seconds wasn’t the sort of thing I was used to hearing so it never occurred to me not to be quick.  
MM:	It was quite hard labour, with the old manual machines, wasn’t it?
CR:	Well, it is.  I have an old manual somewhere, but I wouldn’t use it now because my shoulders are gone but I think I ran through quite a few typewriters in my working [pause] my working life.  I remember we had a, we had a typewriter working and then we went to electric typewriters, which was a great innovation.  A mechanic used to come round, belonging to the firm that supplied them, to check everything, a maintenance engineer if you like, and I got a new Remington electric.  At any rate, up to that time I had a lot of typing to do, throughout the working day and I had this and it kept on going out of order, stopping in the middle of the work.  And the engineer said these aren’t meant to do the work you’re doing and I said what was the use of having them if they weren’t meant to do the work.  It had a nylon cog-wheel and it didn’t, it looked like plastic, you know creamy coloured, and it looked to me like something that would break.  So I said to him, get me one that works [laughs].  Well anyway, the main idea when we were in the College, in the Tutorial Institution, was to get an examination and get a job.  We all were anxious about that and we applied for everything, from writing assistants to clerical officers, clerical assistants, junior executive officers, the lot.  The ESB, the Corporation.  It was very difficult, because the intake, they didn’t take many in.  I don’t think people realise now, they all talk about unemployment, but in unemployment in the 1930s and 40s, there was no facility for getting any [pause] if you didn’t work, you got nothing, you couldn’t earn anything.  The greatest horror of my childhood was what people would do if they were out of work, and my mother and the neighbours, there was a family across the road from us, we all grew up together, and the husband was often what they called ‘idle’, and it was catastrophic.  People nowadays, well if a person if unemployed they can go and claim unemployment benefit or assistance.  It might be hard to go and look for it perhaps, though I don’t think people bother about it now but in those days it was the absolute end and there would be awful hugger-mugger if someone had to go.  It was a terrible disgrace, a terrible disgrace, and you know the expression, I don’t know whether you hear it nowadays, but it was very common then: oh God is good and Jack’s working.  That is, to my mind, a recollection of what it meant to be out of work, work was very hard to find and to the men coming back from the Great War, they were all, and a lot of them would have been injured or wounded or had disabilities, it would have been very, very hard.
MM:	Had your father found it hard to keep in work?
CR:	Well, he had his own difficulties because of the period.  After he left the London [pause] I still don’t know the reason for that [pause] we had just moved into a new house which was far too grand for us but which they had bought, and which they hadn’t been able to [pause] they couldn’t get possession of it because the incumbents wouldn’t move out.  I don’t quite understand it, I think they were strange but they left it in the most dreadful condition.  At any rate, he lost his job.  He had moved from being Secretary to the M.P. to being on the Freeman’s Journal and the Freeman’s Journal folded in a few weeks so that he was again out of work.  My mother was in the course of having another baby, she had a miscarriage, she didn’t have it but she was very ill for a long time, and of all the times that I ever saw him furious, he had a very bad temper but he always controlled it, but it was then because he went berserk and nearly killed her mother, who had told her about him losing the job.  And it was absolute hell, then, that was a hard time.  At any rate, I know the reasons for my continued budgeting and contemplating whenever there’s an expenditure to be made and how to pay for it.  She kept the household going on what savings they had - she always had a Post Office account and that’s what kept us going in the 1920s when my father was out of work.  He got another job then in 1924 and he never lost it after that and he stressed work to us.  It would never occur to me not to work or not to go to work.  I never even [pause] I remember when I was sick, I wasn’t well and are you not going to school today, what’s the matter with you?  He worked at night-time, so he was there in the mornings, and I was always sent out.
MM:	What was your first job when you eventually left College?
CR:	My first job, eventually I got a job in, what were they, it was an importer’s agency, it was one of these things you got by word of mouth.  One of my parent’s friends in the local choir was marrying a girl who was secretary to one of the Board members of T. & C. Martin’s.   But she was moving because every girl had to leave whatever she was working at when she got married, and her sister, who was also working there, was going to get her job.  So the sister’s job was going to be vacant and I was told to report to the agency and they took me on and that was in 1938.  Actually, it was run by a man and his partner, I think, and they had two businesses really, they had a flooring business and they had the importing agency.  The importing agency was chandlery, importing from the Continent, and it was in Middle Abbey Street and I’ll always remember, I was given a bicycle for my eighteenth birthday, cycling in to work and I could put my head out through the window, it was a narrow window and I could see the clock on the Independent, it was the same block.  Whenever there’d be anything exciting happening and there’d be a Stop Press, I don’t know if you know what a Stop Press is, well, the boy would be shrieking up and down the street with the Stop Press and we could find out what it was instantly.  Well, there wasn’t all that much to do, answer the telephone, write a few letters.  The business, they used to take orders for glass, you know plate glass and mirror glass, and it was interesting enough.  I got to know a bit about office work.  And the other one was for flooring, parquet flooring, and I think it was ‘Sorbo’ rubber flooring that they got from France.  But the first place that was bombed in 1939 was the factory that produced the flooring, in Charleroi, I’ll always remember that because although Charleroi was quite a small place, it was the first place that was bombed and I lost my job [laughs].  That was in September 1939, and there was great excitement then because of all the anxiety and the worry about it.  My brother was away in Lourdes on an Augustinian pilgrimage, and there was absolute panic worrying about how they were going to get back and whether they could travel.  They eventually did get back; I think it was the last boat out of wherever they were.  He doesn’t often talk about it but he has from time to time, and the bus trip up through France from Lourdes to the Channel and we had great anxiety until he got home.  There was great relief when he got back although the anxiety about the war went on.  Then in the early part of 1940, my mother had the flu and she was sick in one room and I had congestion of the lungs in the other room.  I hate this time of year, from Christmas to Easter is always a bad time with me, I don’t know why but it always has been.  At any rate, I had a note to say that they didn’t want my services anymore and I was very upset.  It didn’t do me any good, I’d say, and then there was a fair amount of bother about getting unemployment.  
MM:	Was there no question of redundancy payment?
CR:	No, I don’t think there was [pause] I was there for, it was about eighteen months, so no [pause] anyway, when I went down eventually it was a dreadful experience.  It was painful for me to have to present myself anywhere, to begin with, and secondly, when I did get into the Unemployment Exchange, which is where the men’s Unemployment Exchange is now, in Lower Gardiner Street, it was a horrible experience altogether.  One of the first people I saw behind the desk was, in this place where we all got our information or whatever, was a class-mate, one of the girls in the tutorial college.  That was an awful [pause] I was terrified, I really was terrified.  I was a stupid creature in those days; I was completely unready for the world, altogether.  But after that, I remember my father was covering the Feis Ceoil in Sligo, which was at the end of March or the beginning of April, and he’d take me down to give me a break, a sort of convalescence and we were there for a few weeks.  But then I went back to the college, to keep up with the classes in shorthand and typing, to do more exercises and book-keeping.  My father was making any kind of contact, or connection or investigation as to where [pause] I don’t know now where I applied for, but I applied for the Brewery and I was sent for, they sent for me for an interview.   I was terrified, but my father said to me to buy myself a new hat, we wore hats and gloves in those days, we were always very formally turned out.  Even when you were riding a bicycle.  There was no such thing as slacks [pause] that was quite unheard of.  Well, it wasn’t quite unheard of but it was certainly unusual.  Well, I had my interview and then I heard no more about it and I was offered a job in a solicitor’s office.
MM:	Did Guinness’s normally set up a panel of people, something like the Civil Service for instance?
CR:	Did they? I don’t know, I don’t think so, but they hadn’t taken any lady clerks in for a few years and I think they suddenly discovered that they needed them so they held an examination.  There was quite a big number of lady clerks who attended for the examination [pause] it was quite formal, like the Leaving Certificate or something like that, and out of that so many were picked.  In the event, there were 21 of us, which meant there were quite a few they did take, and it was very unusual.  I think I was probably one of the oldest.  I must have been 22, and you were supposed to be 21, 18 to 21 I think it was.  A colleague and myself discovered that we were both – well, we were over the 22 mark anyhow.  But they got great value out of us anyhow, because we both ended up as very senior ladies so it was no great harm.  It was very interesting [pause] actually the Brewery was a very interesting place.  Mind you, I had been in the solicitor’s for about two years, that was interesting though how I managed to get into that - it was a madly republican place and I’m not a republican, I’m not a political animal - I’m not a political person [laughs].  At least I don’t think I am, but it was very interesting.  They were very much involved with a lot of habeus corpus cases and things like that, for a lot of IRA people and people like that who were [pause].
MM:	Were they interned?
CR:	Yes, it was very interesting indeed. We did a lot; we worked hard.  There was a girl out sick who used to do the files, and that’s where I came in, and there was the senior clerk, and a young fellow who came in as an apprentice and is now a very senior person altogether [laughs] and three others.   We had interesting people came in, the senior counsels now who pleaded the actual court cases.
MM:	What sort of duties did you have?
CR:	Well [pause] mainly copying deeds, or conveyancing, and answering the telephone, it was a busy office, well busyish [pause] it had its moments, I think most solicitors’ offices in those days did, it had spurts of activity and when there was anything big on you could be working all night.  In fact, I remember we’d been busy about something, I can’t recall what it was [pause] Tomás Mac Curtin [pause] is that a name? I think it was, I wouldn’t like to stand on oath for it, but we had to go [pause] we’d been working hard and I thought now they won’t want me later and I thought I’d go off and see my friend over in Rathgar and when I got home, at about 10 o’clock on my bicycle and my mother said they’d been over there looking for me.  We hadn’t a phone, either we hadn’t a phone at the time or we had just got our telephone, but anyway there they were with a taxi and we had to go back in.
MM:	And you would literally work all night?
CR:	Oh yes, and we ended up [pause] they had got another lady in, she was in another office, she wasn’t in the clerk’s office but she was a typist, and she was there and we were all there and we ended up going up to Mountjoy to deliver this whatever it was, probably a writ for habeus corpus or whatever it was.  Sean MacBride was the barrister.  It was interesting; it was really quite interesting.
MM:	Did you get some sort of compensation for working those hours? Were you paid overtime?
CR:	Oh no, I don’t think so, not at all. We might get a couple of hours off or something like that.  It was 17/6 I started working there for, I dropped my wages, and after a while they gave me a rise to £1.  That was a promotion and when I told them later I was going to leave, he said I thought you might have continued on and become a clerk, an articled clerk [laughs].  I might have if somebody had said something to me, but the Brewery was interesting.  I went in there in 1942.  We had interesting times in the solicitor’s office.  We were [pause] the bomb that fell on the North Strand in 1941, I think it was 41, yes, I had to [pause] we must have had the telephone all the same in those days because they couldn’t have contacted me otherwise.  Anyhow, on the Bank Holiday Monday, they were having the inquest on those remains that had been picked up on the North Strand and I remember having to go down for something that Mr. MacBride - he was standing in for [pause] for one of them, I think it was a McGlinchy there.  But in the North Strand I often wondered how [pause] but at any rate we did have interesting moments, there were interesting people used to come in there.  Mr. McCarthy, the counsel, the Senior Counsel, very volatile he was and he and Mr. MacBride used to spout French at each other, madly.  They were great, real theatrical types [both laugh].  And then they had the light of my life, Seamus Healy, he used to be in broadcasting, he used to be an announcer.  He had a beautiful voice. He started with An Bord Drámaíochta, the Irish play people. 
MM:	What were the attitudes of the clients and the solicitors to you as a clerk?
CR:	They weren’t too bad; they were all right.  They treated us like human beings. They were friendly.  One of the partners was a very taciturn man, we could never understand what he said, the words were completely incomprehensible.  But his health was bad, and he was out, he was in Jervis Street for a long time and people would bring him books and when he came out there was a whole window full of books that had been given to him.  What I gathered was that when people came he would give them back the books that they had lent.  But it was during the Long Vacation which went on forever, and I used to be sitting there with nothing to do because everybody was away, it was holiday time and they were all gone and the people in all the other offices had gone away.  You know, the Law Library was shut and there was nothing on.  I used to knit, I liked knitting, and then I got fed up knitting and I used to read the books, I remember that Joyce’s Ulysses was one of them and there was something by Zola was another one.  I remember saying I don’t care for that very much. But yes it was very funny, but as I say, in the Long Vacation everybody shut down.
MM:	But you were expected to stay on?
CR:	Well you had to man the phones and take messages but there wasn’t that much to do.  Well, you’d get your typing done or whatever it was but it wouldn’t be much.
MM:	What sort of holiday entitlement did you have?
CR:	Well, I don’t recall any holidays.  I did have them all right, well I must have, but I don’t recall any holidays.  Before I went to work in the Brewery we did have time off. It would be that time of the year, you know, the August or September.  My parents used to go down to the West of Ireland so I think I probably went down with them, in fact I did, down to Salthill in Galway.  That would be 1940 or 1941, in 1942 I started work in the Brewery and you weren’t entitled to any holidays until you had done a stint.  After six months in it you were entitled to two weeks’ holidays, you got two days for the wintertime to be kept after October.  Another girl and myself were started together and as a great concession we were told we could have time off at the same time if we liked.  So we did like and I think we went down to the West and we had a couple of days holidays there and it was quite pleasant.  I remember we picked two saddle bags of hips, not hips, haws, that’s right, and she said her mother would make jam out of them if we could get the sugar.  So we brought back the two saddle bags and she did actually, we managed to get a little bit of extra, you see the rationing was on and there was always a great deal of calculation as to where you, as to how you could stretch things.  Sugar in our house was [pause] and tea, because both my parents were tea drinkers and my father liked sugar with his tea and he liked a lot of sugar.  That created a great deal of anxiety all the time as to where you could get the sugar, or a bit of that or bit of the other.  I often thought that it was a great godsend that we got our main meal in the Brewery, we were fed.  We were very well looked after the in the Brewery, it was a marvellous place in those days.  We often talk about it, we have a little group and we meet, about four, five or six of us.  I’m the youngest so you can imagine how the others are.  We were well looked after; it was a good place to work.  It was like a small town, with the gossip and the chatter and so on and so forth, not a bit like it is now, where it’s all computers and I don’t know if they’ve any permanent staff at all left, or just very few. 
MM:	Would you have had friends among your work mates?
CR:	Not very many, as I said, I’m a loner.  I get on with people but I haven’t any closeness with anybody in particular. Now, of course, I have more but in those days it was, you went to work and that was it, and you went home and that was it.  It was like living separate lives, separate compartments.  Except in the autumn of 1940 my dad said would I like to join the R & R.   Now I was a very shy creature, I wasn’t a bit outgoing.  I wanted to be but I couldn’t.  But they were joining and myself, we went over and joined.  There were people in it that he knew, so we joined it and I must admit it was a great experience altogether.  It was a great experience and then about a year or so after that, it might have been 1941, I think it was, I went to have singing lessons and that was a tremendous help to me.  It made my life quite different.  At least, looking back on it I realise that it did, it made me much more confident.  The R & R was great.  We used to practice in Rathmines in a hall up the stairs at the back of a teashop.  Actually, it was in the house next door to where the infamous Nurse Cadden had her nursing home.  And actually she had lived up the road, not too far from us, and she had the reputation of being a very flamboyant person altogether.  She lived about six or seven houses up on the opposite side and then she had this place over in Rathmines.  She was very notorious altogether.  At any rate we rehearsed in the hall at the back of the cafe that was there, I don’t know if it’s there now. We were very enthusiastic; we put everything we had into it. 
MM:	What sort of parts would you have played?
CR:	The ladies chorus in The Gondoliers or the fairies in Iolanthe or members of the household in the Yeomen of the Guard, things like that.  It was mostly Gilbert and Sullivan in those days and then there was great excitement about 1942, I think it was, in February 1942, and in the summer of that year, July I think it was, or June, members of the R & R had been asked if they would supply a small group to take part in the Beggars Opera which the DMS were putting on in the Gaiety, produced by MacLiammóir and Edwards, and May Derritt was playing Polly Peachum and Eire O’Reilly was Lucy Locket and it was at the time when the two ladies were jointly involved with Joe Locke, he was Joe McLoughlin then, and the DMS, they were the rag, tag and bobtail, they were the beggars and there were definitely two layers, it was very funny [laughs].  I think there were six of us went down to be ladies of the town, in the Peachum ménage.  And about a month before that there was a scare about smallpox and we all had to be vaccinated, especially those of us who hadn’t been vaccinated before because we were supposed to be vaccinated coming into the Brewery, I don’t quite know why.  It was one of the stipulations, you had your medical examination and then this thing broke out and we all were vaccinated.  July was quite a warm summer that year and we were rehearsing for the show, I think it was put it on for about a fortnight, and we ended up in a big thing [pause] there was a tableau at the end of the first act, with the ladies of the town having swarmed in and sort of bending up [pause]. Mac Liammóir was very keen on pictures, it was right up - they started on the bottom with the beggars out on an outside proscenium, and then this second layer, and then there was a table and there we were up on the table, not all of us, there were two or three of us on the table.  There we were, and I was in a fever, I think I was reacting to the vaccination, it was two weeks after it and I should have been passed over.  I remember saying at the time would it be all right and I think the doctor said yes, it would be okay, but anyway, over I went [pause]. I’d forgotten totally about that until about three weeks or a month ago when somebody died in the district and I discovered she was the sister of one of the male clerks, one of the juniors, he was only in a year or two ahead of me, and he had been on holiday and sent a rude picture or something [pause]. I had forgotten totally about it and my friend, who was at the funeral, reminded me of this [pause] and I said I hadn’t seen him for ages.  He lives in the parish now, he’s extremely crippled with arthritis, but he remembers you all right [laughs].  He said does she remember 1942 at the Gaiety [both laugh].  The Brewery was very much like a girl’s boarding school, very much and it was very hierarchical and very class conscious and you didn’t speak until you were spoken to.  Now I worked in what they called an outside hut, right from the start, another girl and myself, we were despatched to the lower levels to take up for two ladies who were retiring, they were getting married or retiring, I can’t remember which.  So we were there and as an outside department, it was almost slightly in a different place altogether. 
MM:	Does that mean it was off the main Brewery?
CR:	It does, it was down on the river.  The Traffic Department was down on the river and we were cut off from the upper level, which was Thomas Street/James’s Street on the main Brewery, which was up on the top level.  It had its own jargon and its own expressions and things, very interesting.  I loved my time in the Brewery.  
MM:	Would you have had much to do with the other workers, the people who came in apart from the office with you?
CR:	Well in fact we had a fair bit because we went down we were junior clerks and we just made the entries, clerical work, keeping the records.  Every cask that went out had to be recorded.  I don’t know what they do now, they’d probably be absolutely horrified to think there was so much manual work but anyway, we entered up the casks as they went out.  Each district had its own sheet and the beer was despatched by train, or by boat, though that was a separate section, in shipping, that involved the transport and the staffing and the customs.  My colleague, she went in there eventually but we started off in the ordinary traffic office and we recorded all the traffic that went out and it had to be recorded from each section of the country. The Great Southern Railway, the Great Northern Railway, the Midland and Western which was the west, and the Dublin ‘Slow and Easy’ down to Wexford. And then there were the ‘own car’ customers, they were people who’d buy their own beer and come in and collect it.  And there were also the ‘hack’ boats, the canal transport.  There were quite a lot to deal with, because they were, the casks were all filled in the Traffic Department; they were all filled outside our door, so to speak.  The noise was tremendous, because there were casks being rolled around the place all the time and then when they went over to metal casks after the war the din was unbelievable.  There was a great deal of activity around that place all the time.  There was a big staff of men, workers you know the manual workers, and the Cooperage Department was just a little adjunct, it was where the casks were made and maintained and looked after.  I was sent over after a year or two to learn the relief work there, for the girl clerk there, she used to keep the records of the hours the men worked and that sort of thing. Traffic was quite a large department really with the freight and the shipping and customs, and the dispatch section.  The Traffic Manager used to sit in his office, it was quite a good size office, with the books out on one side the Assistant Manager on the other side, and in the centre was the staircase down on to the what we called the ‘floor’ which was a vast area, with the machines which filled the casks.  The men clerks used to come every morning to be interviewed by and report to the manager, and eventually it would be translated down to the junior clerks [pause]. I would never get instructions directly from the Traffic Manager; he wouldn’t talk to us.
MM:	Was that because you were a woman?
CR:	No, because I was young [laughs] and I was a Catholic, which was considered to be [pause]. but I didn’t mind, I didn’t utter in those days.
MM:	Well, was there a policy in the company to promote Protestants?
CR:	No, no, it was a question of being long enough there.  I got promotion after five years, which was considered to be very quick. It was very much a world of its own, very much a world of its own and we always said that we were cut off, we had a world of our own in the Traffic Department but the main building had a bigger number of lady clerks.  Actually, when I speak to my pensioner mates I realise that there was quite a different way of living there altogether, a different attitude altogether.
MM:	In what sense?
CR:	I don’t know, it was very much [pause] like the school attitude.  They all knew each other; there was a greater camaraderie.  But then they all did know each other.  It was very interesting actually; the Brewery was a great place to work.  You either worked very hard or you didn’t work at all.  We worked very hard and there only about fifteen ladies - in the Department.  There was a big staff but they had all sorts of facilities, I mean they were very good - they had a medical department and then they had the athletic union, which didn’t survive, they hadn’t [pause] they didn’t keep it going during the war.  In fact the other day I met a friend who’s in the choir and he’d come back to [pause] we were giving a memorial concert for our founder and a mass for him, and there were a few of us who were there.  Anyway, he said do you remember the tennis club?  The tennis club brought over a team from Park Royal, which was the English branch, to play and needless to say there was great excitement.  There was a fair round of inter-brewery competition. They had hockey and they had cricket and they had the tennis and they had football, they had a very good football side which was sort of, I think you’d say semi-professional and I know there was tremendous uproar, I’d only just gone into work at the time, but I remember whatever they did the whole St. James’s Gate team was disbanded.  I don’t know if they play now, I’m out of touch.  But we had that and then they had the Fanciers.  The Fanciers was an association, which was set up.  The lady staff was usually hounded by the senior ladies to come and produce things for it.  It happened in July every year and the Fanciers were originally pigeon fanciers, pigeons and then dogs and they had a show and then [pause] the Fanciers and Industrial Association, that’s right. The Industrial Association was for home crafts, they made jams and cakes and bread and handicrafts, sewing and knitting and embroidery and there was a flower show, flowers and vegetables.  Tremendous excitement - we all went and did our bit.  They’d have very senior ladies from the Department of Education and Cathal Brugha Street who would come to judge the exhibits and the Horticultural Society would judge.  It was very well run, very well run.  It sort of, it faded away after a few years, it just died which is a pity but they’re trying to revive it in the last few years and they have what they call Family Day up in Crumlin.  They have new grounds and they have these new buildings I believe, I haven’t seen them yet, they have a good time there.
MM:	What sort of hours were you working:
CR:	We worked nine to four.
MM:	Was that five days a week?
CR:	No, we did it for five and a half days - nine to four or half nine to half four, depending on what your manager wanted or the head of your office.  I say that from knowing what my colleagues in the upper level did.  We all did nine to four and we had half an hour for our lunch, which was from twelve to half past twelve or from half past twelve to one.  There were sittings - there were two dining rooms - they were fairly good too, you don’t realise how good they were and we got a good lunch, we got a three-course lunch.  How they managed it during the wartime I don’t know but we did have a three-course lunch in any case and it was marvellous, it really was marvellous. 
MM:	Did you have to pay for that?
CR:	No, we didn’t have to pay for it.  We were extremely well looked after - the Brewery was a wonderful place to work and I think of those of us who did work there, most of us appreciated it.  There were of course always a few people who would play on it or wouldn’t pull their full weight but you get that everywhere.  They were very good and well the men got clothing, the workmen who had to do the heavy work.  They got a certain clothing allowance or clothing - well the safety regulations then were sort of minimal.  Nowadays, it’s very much more advanced and it’s tremendous - they have competitions for people to make suggestions for safety, which I think are pretty well received but in those days they got protective footwear, particularly for the men in my department who were rolling wooden casks and they could roll them on their feet.  They got heavy boots with a reinforced toecap - the toecaps were reinforced, they were metal and they had those and they also had corduroys.  Corduroys, that reminds me, I said to you before that we didn’t have much in those days in the line of slacks and things but at any rate, the corduroys, they were genuine corduroys made out of moleskin, the ‘mouldskin’ trousers, at any rate I remember saying to my manager, who I think was very kind to me, a fiercesome man altogether but [pause] I was too terrified to say anything but apparently he thought I was thinking things [pause]. I remember approaching him, one of my mates was keen on getting a pair of moleskin trousers and she said they’d be marvellous and I laughed and when they were getting them for the men we measured ourselves [pause]. I had them for years and years.  They were vast around the [pause] they went sort of straight down, but my friend went off to live in South Africa after a while, but I had them and eventually I used them for covering cushions.  They were genuine moleskin, such a heavy weight, marvellous.  Anyway they got these trousers and they got oilskins and then the ship’s men, they got uniforms too.  In fact, last month I saw where one of the ship’s captains had died and I thought he was dead years ago.  He must have been a very good age.  He retired in the fifties, I’m sure it was fifties anyway - he was a very distinguished sort of gentleman altogether, he was tall and thin, very gaunt.  They were all characters in their own way, some of them.  There was another one of them who was forever running into the locks in Manchester and crashing into them.  You’d get a message saying ‘stormbound’, ‘lockbound’, ‘damage to eastern lock’.  Whenever I hear eastern lock I still think of him [laughs].   It wasn’t so funny then, I mean it was very bad but he lasted.  He had a drink problem I think but there were an extraordinary number of characters but nowadays I think they [pause] there’s no special characterful people.  No, that was the way, we got our lunch and we had medical attention, we got treatment and we had physiotherapy if we had to have anything in the line of massage or em, strapping up or not just sprains, but if you had rheumatism or anything like that, they were very good to us.
MM:	And were the wages as good?
CR:	They were, they were I suppose.  When I went in it was £2 a week, which was double what I was getting.  But you were paid by the month so that you didn’t always get £2 a week, you know.  If you had a five-week month it was different but it was good, well I thought it was great.  I wasn’t complaining but I was living at home, of course.
MM:	Well, I was going to ask you about that.  How did you work out the domestic arrangements?  Did you hand money up to your mother?
CR:	I handed money up, yes, I gave my mother, I don’t remember how much it was but I think I had five bob a week, that was what I would keep for myself and I wouldn’t use it all. Because you wouldn’t have [pause] you couldn’t get stockings, for instance, silk stockings were unheard of and then of course, when the nylons came out first of all, somebody bringing them in from Belfast or something like that [pause] there was a lot of make doing and mending and remaking and we did a lot of knitting.  There wasn’t much to spend money on.  There was black market food if you could but I don’t remember my mother ever dealing with people who had any, we never did; we just managed on what was there.
MM:	How did you manage the housework? Did she look after that?
CR:	She looked after the house.  I did my stint; well I always had because from the time that I was five she had bad health.  Well I’d prepare a meal and I always did the washing up afterwards and the making up of your own room.  The consequence is of course that I’m completely undomesticated as far as cleaning is concerned.  I hate cleaning, I don’t think I even did a clearup today and I had a meeting yesterday so I had to make an effort but I’m not [pause]. I was always a reader, I’d be reading or out in the theatricals, the amateur dramatics but we always did our share.
MM:	Did your brother do his fair share?
CR:	I don’t think so, no, I don’t recall him ever doing very much except under duress.  He’s three or four years younger than I am - he was still at school and then he went on - like that he had difficulty getting work and I can’t remember whether he was trying to get a job or he was trying to study.  He always did study but he studied at night-time and he worked, or he worked days.  I can’t recall, I know that he did a law degree and he was working in the newspaper world as well and he did a bit of writing then as well.  He never practiced law and he worked, he did general editor for the magazine, the radio paper before the RTE Guide, the one before that.  He worked for RTE but he does a lot now of his own, he’s very fussy, actually he reminds me of my father very much, into doing everything.  My father was very good, as I said my mother’s health was very bad she wasn’t really able to do much, but she was all right.  She did all the things that one had to do like cooking and baking and she liked to do handiwork and things like that.  
MM:	Who did the shopping:
CR:	She did the shopping, she’d go out and she’d shop.  She’d walk up the whole length of Ranelagh to say twopence.  I always said you only spent that on your heels but I think she liked; she used to meet people.  In those days there were no supermarkets and the shops were all personalised and you knew everybody and you’d know the people in the district and the butcher and the greengrocer and the grocer and the mills.  The Blanchardstown Mills had a very big branch in Ranelagh and she was very friendly with the assistant manageress there.  They had her own little way of doing things.  She read a lot and then I got her television and that was a great help, she liked it, she’d switch the radio on.  Her health was very bad, she wasn’t able to do very much and the older I get, the more I realise that she had a tough life.  She was a difficult woman.  She had very strong views about everything.  In fact I’d come in after the day and she’d almost sort of be looking for something to fight about.  You had to play things in a different way, if she was in good humour [pause] if she wasn’t in good humour you had to be careful.  She was like her father, he was that kind; he had a very searing tongue.  I could never understand him; he was difficult to follow.  He was an interesting character.  My brother maintains that he was a great man, he could follow him; he could understand what he said.  I could never understand what he said.  I won’t say never, but only occasionally.  He’d been in the army anyway, I think I’d run away to be a soldier when he was about fifteen, which would have been in the 1860s, you know, he was always younger looking than he actually was.  He ended up I think as an instructor in something or another, of his regiment.  I don’t think he got further than a sergeant instructor.  But he had an interesting life.  He was away in the North African campaign with Kitchener in Khartoum, and how I know that, I have his medal, he got the Star of Egypt, I have it, it’s bronze and he was also in Salonika.  Now I can’t work out the times, you know, but he started off as I say at about fifteen or sixteen years old and what age he would have been I don’t know.  
MM:	So he spent all his life in the British Army?
CR:	He spent most of his life, he came out, he was discharged in 1917, I think it was and he was discharged as unfit for duty.  He was pushing on and I think they had discovered his age.  There was a very strange quirk, I have his parchment discharging him and it was signed by a subaltern, you know the young lieutenant who would do the clerking work, but it was signed in 1917, he must have been about 17 or 18 then, and he turned out to be one of our managing directors eventually. I thought that was the strangest coincidence that I’d ever come across.  He’d been away in the Indian Army and he was a fairly old man then, he was retired from [pause] he had been in India.  He’d been in Malta, as far as I could tell he’d been everywhere but you wanted to take a certain amount of grain of salt with it, but I think he was.
MM:	But your mother hadn’t actually travelled with him?
CR:	They didn’t travel at all.  I think it was difficult when he came back but he was quite old and he couldn’t get any work.  Then he lost a leg from his wounds during the war.  He was in Leopardstown Hospital, actually, and he died there in 1942.  She was dead a long time earlier, his bride, my grandmother.  She died in 1931; she had a bad chest or something.  A very gentle sort of person.  I don’t know whether they’d run away or not but she’d been cut off by her family because of him [pause] he wasn’t a Catholic and he was a soldier.  Oh the ins and outs, life is very strange.  I’ve just finished reading a book by Barbara Vine which was geared about that time, you know, in those days you didn’t do this and you didn’t do that.  It’s extraordinary how attitudes and society’s behaviour in Ireland have changed in the last fifty years.  Quite extraordinary, for a person who is young they wouldn’t believe the things, the taboos and the regulations.
MM:	Oh they’ve changed very much in my lifetime.  My daughter is eighteen and the world she inhabits is so different to the one I grew up in.
CR:	Well this is it, its quite incredible.  I wouldn’t be young now for any money.  I think it’s very, very difficult life for them, very difficult.
Colette Interview, 30th October 1997

CR1

