Daisy & Ivy, Falls Road, Belfast.  Interview: 30th November 1996.

NM:	My name is NM.  I was born in 1921, on the 2nd December.  Tomorrow’s my birthday.  We were born in Serbia Street off the Falls Road.  
EC:	My name is EC and I was born on the 28th August 1924.  I was always called Daisy.
MM:	When you were growing up, was it just the two of you?
EC:	No, here were six of us - three boys and three girls.  
MM:	The same as my family.  Where did you go to school?
NM:	I went to Guildford Street.  
MM:	How long did you stay there?
EC:	Until we were fourteen years of age.  You stopped school on Friday and started work on Monday.  You went into [pause] the Blackstaff Mill, yes the Blackstaff.
MM:	What sort of work did you do?
NM:	I was a winder, in the Blackstaff.
MM:	Did you get training when you went in there?
NM:	Just somebody was put beside you and taught you [pause] you were always put beside somebody to learn you, you know.  It depended on yourself really.
MM:	And when you started work, were you in the same place?
EC:	Yes, we were in the same place.  
NM:	Then I went into the Queen’s University, just to clean and we were cleaners in the Queen’s University.  I would start at seven.
MM:	When you were in the mill, did you have to start early in the morning?
NM:	Eight o’clock.  You started at eight and went to six o’clock and you worked from eight to twelve on Saturday.  We got a lunch time from one to two.  
EC:	You’d see the whole road down, all the girls coming home for their dinner.  Then you finished for the day at six o’clock.  You worked from eight to twelve on a Saturday.
MM:	That was a long enough week.  Did you get any holidays during the year?
NM:	Just the one.  We got one holiday, the twelfth of July, you got the twelfth and thirteenth.  We just got the two days and you weren’t paid for them.  [Laughs]  They were queer times then.
MM:	I presume that living round here [the Falls Road] that most people were Catholics?
EC:	Oh yes, they were.
MM:	Well, how would you have felt about having to take the time off without pay for an essentially Protestant holiday?  The twelfth of July of all days?
NM:	You had to take it off.  There was no way you could pick your holidays now - you just had to take the twelfth and thirteenth.  
MM:	Was this true of the 1940s?
NM:	During the war? Oh aye.
MM:	Did you work the same hours then?
EC:	We worked till nine o’clock at night.  Aye that was for the war, you know, for parachutes, stuff for parachutes, nylon, things like that.
MM:	When you started work when you were fourteen, what were you paid?
NM:	My first pay was seven and eight pence.
EC:	Mine was the same.  We were paid the same rate.
MM:	So was there any difference between the rates paid before and during the war?
NM:	Well, you made your own pay then.  You could be doing six or seven hours overtime whenever there was a big order on for the war.  Lord have mercy on my mother, she used to say the men weren’t much for bringing in the money.  The men on the street were working for the Relief and then they got a chit for boots but they weren’t bringing much home for the children.
MM:	So did you bring home your money?
EC:	You handed up your money.  [Laughs} You wouldn’t not hand it over.
MM:	Were you given anything to spend for yourself?
NM:	Oh aye, you got maybe a half a crown, you were lucky if you got a half a crown.  After all, you had to buy maybe a wee smoke then, you know what I mean?  Well, cigarettes were cheap, they were five for three pence.  
MM:	Did your mother decide how the money would be spent?
EC:	There’d be no nonsense about it.  Not like now.  You gave your mother your money and if you were lucky you got some back.
MM:	How old were you when you were doing this?
EC:	Nancy was a married woman [pause] my mother died when I was fourteen.  So my mother’s sister took us over.  She reared us then from when I was fourteen.  You [Nancy] weren’t married a year when my mother died.  She died on Christmas Eve and my aunt Marie took us over.  You got your pay and you’d give your money in.  You didn’t open it; you’d have been afeared to open it.  You know what I mean?  Now don’t get me wrong, she was the best, my aunt was the best and my mother, but I mean it wasn’t that they were strict but you knew not to do them things.  You know what I mean?
MM:	And your brothers, would they also have handed up their money?
EC:	Oh yes.  
MM:	How long did you stay living at home.
EC:	I wasn’t married.  
NM:	I was married.  I was at home till then.
MM:	And up until that time had you never managed your own money even to give you experience of doing it?
NM:	The week before you were married you gave your mother your money.  She’d give you back a wee bit of it.
MM:	So what did you do about saving to get married?
NM:	Well, he saved.  He had to save.  And then there was no houses and I went to Leo’s family and they let us have a room with them.  And Leo found [pause] a week before I was married his brother got a house and he wanted to share it so I went into two rooms in that.  You were very lucky when you got two rooms.  I was very lucky the way things happened that I got the two rooms.
MM:	Were you still working at this stage?
NM:	Oh yes.  I worked for a year after I was married and up to the time for my baby.  I had four children.  
MM:	And were you still in the two rooms with the four children?
NM:	No, eventually Leo’s brother went away and we got the house.  And Leo was able to pay the rent then.
[Indecipherable section]
MM:	Lily, you stayed at home?
EC:	I stayed at home.  My aunt lived till she was ninety and I stayed with her.  I left seven years before that to mind her.  I never got a halfpenny, I never got a halfpenny from anywhere.  You couldn’t, see, when you were looking after people, you couldn’t work.
MM:	Even though you were saving the State the cost of caring for your aunt?
EC:	You wouldn’t have got nothing.  I looked after her for seven years.
MM:	How old were you ?
EC:	I must have been in my thirties.  Seven years I was with her.  I just looked after her and the house.  But then I went back into the mill again after the seven years.  
MM:	Seven years was a long time with no income.
EC:	Anything she had, she kept for me for they had disallowed me, you know, for looking after her.  She got her pension and then I had to go down every few weeks and renew it, you know, and get a stamp off the pension.  
MM:	So that means that you had no savings for yourself either?
EC:	No, because I’d nothing coming in.  Your mother, she’d kept your money, or your aunt, there was nobody else there to do it, you know what I mean?  
NM:	People didn’t have much then so you got your wages and that just kept you.  People didn’t have over and above that, you just lived under it.  
EC:	Everybody, you were all the same like, everybody’s troubles the same.  They’re all keeping up with the Joneses now - you know what I mean?  Now we were just [pause] always to good food on the table, and always a good fire and always a good bed.  All was comfort and all was clean, no grandeur now, there was no style but you were always comfortable.
NM:	My man was only earning twenty two pounds eighty a week when he died in the seventies and we had that for everything.  He was always sure of what he spent and nothing over.  
MM:	Would that have been different to your neighbours, what they could earn?
NM:	No, not really, no.  We were all the same and we shared what there was.  It was very, very often that you’d get help from a neighbour one time and then you’d return it another when they needed it.  
EC:	They’d close the door on you now.  But we now [pause] we looked out for the neighbours and they looked out for you.  If your mother had been making soup, she’d have brought us in a bowl of soup.  If we had of been making soup, we’d have brought you in a bowl.  Oh yes, it was just sharing and everyone did it.
NM:	My mother would have loaned money if she had it and then when they got their payday they’ve give it back and if she needed it, they’d lend it to her.  That was the way people went.
EC:	They were better days than what they are now.
MM:	Do you think people everywhere are more selfish now?
EC:	Oh yes.  They’re all, if you have that I’ll get bigger than you.  I see it that way.  You’re younger than me; I see it that way.  I see a terrible change in the people in the world now.  Everybody’s out to get one another, they’d shut their door on you now.
NM:	In those days, if anybody couldn’t help a neighbour they’d send you on but with a good word and then after that, if they could help you or do you a good turn, they would remember.
[Indecipherable section]
MM:	What about the wider community?  If that was how it was in your street, would it have applied to neighbours in the area but maybe further afield?
EC:	You’d stay in your own area you know.  Although maybe there was some man died and people would know he wasn’t in a society and they’d come round the door and lift it for them.  The burial wasn’t as dear as it now.  
NM:	My mother had no grave.  She was the last of her family and they couldn’t afford to buy a grave so she would have been helped to buy a grave.
MM:	Who would have helped with it - he neighbours or the church?
NM:	The Church would have helped you out then.  There was the St. Vincent de Paul.  They helped people out.
MM:	Who was in the St. Vincent de Paul?  Was that local people?
EC:	They were local people - that’s right.  
NM:	They were a cut above everybody else, of course.  No them people only came if you were in dire need [pause] they’d give you money for groceries or give you money for clothes or anything.  
MM:	Was there any suggestion that people would get together to change conditions in the area rather than just helping out in times of dire need?
EC:	No, not in our day.  If you’d had a collection then people knew you were poor and you maybe wouldn’t want that.
MM:	What about in the workplace?  Were you members of a trade union?
NM:	There was one woman, she was a Union woman and she was taking money for the girls ... she was sacked.  She went somewhere else.  Her forewoman was against it.
MM:	She got fired?  What did she do after that, could she get another job?
NM:	She went somewhere else.  There was foremen that was for that and there was foremen that was against it.  Well our man was against it – he didn’t like the Union.  But I’m sure she got a job somewhere else.  
MM:	Was it a well known thing that your employer was against union membership?  What about the men, did they ever try to get unionised?
NM:	There was never no men, there was all women working in our mill.  
MM:	Would there have been women managers?
NM:	Just forewomen, there was forewomen over us and there was the boss then.  
MM:	Could women from the shop floor have been promoted?  What did you have to do to be made a forewoman?
NM:	Maybe a worker would have been promoted, that’s right, but that was all, they didn’t get any further.  
EC:	You could be a forewoman but like, you didn’t just walk into that job like.  You had to know so and so, to get that job, you know what I mean?  You didn’t just automatically go onto that.  I think they didn’t really get enough money for that job either.  They didn’t get much extra money and you were always being called an old so-and-so for doing that job.  You weren’t one of us [laughs].
MM:	I’ve read accounts of the mill girls singing as they’d walk up and down the road to work?  Do you remember anything like that?
NM:	Oh aye.  I remember going up the Falls Road and they sung going down the road, didn’t they, a row of them.  It was very good right enough. Some lovely girls there were, too, there were some lovely girls and always with a song.  And always with a song: You’d easy know a dopper.  That was a mill song, so it was, and they sung going down the road.  That road was black, you wouldn’t see anything in the morning.
EC:	But they were all from the spinning end of it, you see, we were a wee cut above them, see, we weren’t spinners.  But the spinners did that, going along singing.
MM:	Did you feel that your work was easier or why did you think it made you better?
EC:	Well, we worked in a dry place.  You see the spinners went in their bare feet and all, you know, but our place was always dry.
[Indecipherable section]
MM:	Were you affected by air raids during the war, I mean did you have to be evacuated?
EC:	We were up here; we were evacuated up here.  We’d come up after nine o’clock at night and walk from here down into the mill in the mornings.  
MM:	This was the end of the Falls Road where you’re living now? That must have been tough going.  Was there no public transport?
EC:	No.  Just walking and you had to be in at eight o’clock.  You had no choice.  We just wandered off down, that was all.  You had to work and that was all.  
NM:	My first child, my daughter, she was born on the 3rd May and the last blitz was the 4th May.  And she was born in Arizona Street  [pause] well I wasn’t in my own house; I was in another house.  I couldn’t stay there - it was frightening but you didn’t look at it like that, everybody done it.  We went into the street but like, it wasn’t you.
MM:	Did your husband help at the birth?
NM:	He was working; he was a barman.  In fact, we were evacuated just before the birth.  He got home and he was in the bar the night before and he didn’t know about Hannah till the next morning.  
MM:	Did you give birth to your other children at home?
NM:	You never went to hospital.  I never went to hospital, I had four, five.  You booked your midwife after you knew you were pregnant and after that, she would come.  Only in strict circumstances, you would call a doctor.  You couldn’t afford a doctor.
MM:	Would your mother also have given birth at home?
EC:	Yes.  Everybody did in those days.
[Indecipherable section]  
EC:	We were reared comfortable but there was hunger too.  
MM:	Were you ever aware of any moves by politicians or other public figures who might be trying to improve things in the neighbourhood?  I’m thinking about Nationalist politicians like Joe Devlin, for instance.
NM:	We didn’t bother about politics, no, you’d be too busy trying to look after the children and keep the house, you know.  I never heeded it till the Troubles come.
EC:	You’d know the people come to visit you and you’d pay your respects to them like, but you’d never ask them what they come from, no.  
MM:	Were there any particular aspects of the war that had an impact on your lives, apart from the bombing raids?
EC:	The rationing – I’ll never forget the rationing.  You couldn’t get anything.
MM:	Other women I’ve spoken to told me about smuggling things up from the South?  Did you ever do anything like that?
EC:	We went to Dublin on the train once.  We were up there one day and her young lad [Nancy’s] - the curtains, you couldn’t get curtains here, she wanted a door curtain for one of the wee houses, down where we used to live, and we wrapped a bit around him, ended up we were coming from the train and he was going along with a big lump of curtain hanging down.  And the men seen him, the Customs men was looking at him, as much to say look what you left behind.  Oh aye, lots of stuff was brought through at that time.  That was all, you bought it and they took it off you and that was that.
MM:	You mean that they confiscated goods at the Customs?
NM:	Yes, you’d have people coming in with all sorts of things wrapped round them and if the Customs caught them they’d have to take off all the coats and skirts they were bringing and leave them.
MM:	Did you ever smuggle food – like butter and other things that didn’t seem to be as scarce in the South?
NM:	People did that all right.  
EC:	My friend got tea for her mother.  But the blackout was awful.  You weren’t allowed out, I was allowed out because I had a pass for work, but you couldn’t see a thing in front of you.  
[Remainder of interview (about ten minutes) was indecipherable because of the noise of the washing machine which had been running in the background.]



Daisy & Ivy Interview 30th November 1996

L&N1

