Emily, Belfast. Interview: 30th November 1996.

EI:	I was born on the 28th April 1911.  I’m in my 86th year.  I was born in Waterford Street off the Falls Road and remained there during my married life and all because there was nobody else left in the house and I had to stay with my mother.  We came up here to Hillhead in 1965.  
MM:	So you’ve always lived in Belfast?
EI:	I spent all my life in Belfast and during the Troubles.  I was the third of a family of six, one of them died.  During the Troubles, we got out of Waterford Street because everybody left the town and the Falls Road was black with people getting out to lie out in the fields at night.  You would hardly have got room to walk on the Falls Road, during the Troubles.
MM:	Would this have been during the 1970s?
EI:	Well, during the War.  And things were very scarce.  You got 2 oz. of butter to do you for a week and one egg and so much tea and so much sugar.  And then you had bread units as they were called.  You had to get bread tickets.  You had to show that and you got so much bread.  
Well then, you went away out and you picked your spot.  Well, I was lucky enough that I had a sister living, Lord rest her, on the Glen Road, it was only her and her husband so my family was able to get all into the one house.  You could lie on the floor.
MM:	Where would this have been in relation to where you were in Waterford Street?
EI:	Off the Glen Road, up high in the hills, up the Glen Road.  And then you had to start off in the morning at six o’clock, again to go down to get walking because you never would have got transport and I had to walk away from that to the Co. Down railway because our office was blitzed in Chichester Street and we got an office, or a house, in Bangor, outside Bangor.  So I had to run away down and get whatever transport you could get or it was Shank’s Mare, as we called it.
MM:	What was your office doing? 
EI:	Navy, Army and Air Force.  We done the clerical work there.  The canteens were supplied with stuff and the bills were all sent in to us and we had to check them to see if they got it in and to see if the amounts were paid in the office and all the rest.
MM:	Had you done anything like that before the war?
EI:	I was a book-keeper in a small firm and I was getting low wages so I left it and walked into this job when the war started and I worked with them till my father died in 1943.  Then I had to leave because there was nobody to look after the business and I went in the shop then.
MM:	What sort of shop was it?
EI:	A little of everything.  It was off the Falls Road.  
MM:	Can we go back a little bit?  Before you went to work, what sort of education did you have?
EI:	I went to the Sisters of Charity in Dunleer Street and then when it come the last year, my brother and myself, we were supposed to be the two intelligent people, so he had got a scholarship to St. Malachy’s College and I went to the Dominican Convent up the Falls Road on a scholarship as well.
MM:	Would any of your friends from junior school gone on with you?
EI:	Well, people hadn’t the money then to pay for education.  A lot of girls left and went to England to nurse because you had to pay to get into the hospitals here to do nursing.  
MM:	Did you stay in the school for a full secondary education?
EI:	No, I left because I was getting a job.  After two years I left to do a clerical job.  I was sixteen.  
MM:	What would your friends from junior school have done if they didn’t go on to secondary school?
EI:	Some of them were working in the mills from when they were twelve year old, ten, they went half time in the mills.  
MM:	I’ve read accounts of the women going into the mills in the early morning, singing as they went in.  Did you hear anything like that?
EI:	Yes, they lived around me and the mills were all around us.  The Blackstaff on Odessa Street, the Clonard Street Mill and there was the Ross Mill, and Milford Weaving, they done all the weaving for the Irish linen.  And I remember the day the war was over, the whole factory ran out, out on to the street, cheering and shouting.  We just lived next door to it, ours was a kind of a continuation of the factory and above us on the same road was the dining hall belonging to the factory, and things were very scarce then.
MM:	Would it have made any difference to your relations with the other girls that you were going on to school and they were out doing what was very hard work?
EI:	No, not at all, there was no difference.  We still had them in until we came up here.  They’re near all in Milltown now.  
MM:	So when you went in to work in your first job, how many hours a day were you doing?
EI:	I started work about half eight and you had to work on Saturday too.  It was a half day on Saturday, till one o’clock on a Saturday. 
MM:	What about finishing time during the week?
EI:	From half eight in the morning until six o’clock at night. 
MM:	Did you get any time off for a lunch break?
EI:	I suppose I got about an hour because I went home for my dinner.  
MM:	Was the office near your home?
EI:	No, it wasn’t, it was down at the Market.
MM:	How did you get in and out to work?
EI:	You got a penny for your bus fare or your tram fare up at lunchtime.  You walked it in the morning going down and you come back in the tram and walked it back at lunchtime and walked it home at night.
MM:	That must have kept you fairly fit.  Did you walk so much to save money?
EI:	Well, I was only a junior clerk and then when the head clerk left I got her job but the wages were nothing.  
MM:	What were your duties?  Were you doing typing and shorthand?
EI:	There was no such thing then - no typing.  There was a telephone and the accounts and the boss, he signed the cheques; I wrote out the cheques and he signed them.  
MM:	Can you remember what you were getting paid at that time?
EI:	When I left I was getting, from I started at 10s a week; you got a penny out of that to go home on the tram for your dinner, Shank’s Mare the rest, and then when I left, £1.25 and went into the NAAFI and had over £7 a week.  No wonder you’d want to change.
MM:	Did you have a supervisor or were you left to get on with your work yourself?
EI:	You would; I mean you got leave to work and nobody interfered with you.
MM:	Was the NAAFI office easier to get to than your previous job?
EI:	Our office was blitzed, the Navy, Army and Air Force office was blitzed in Chichester Street and we went away, we got offices in Ballymena, and from Ballymena we got a place in Bangor, just outside Bangor.  So that was why we travelled from Belfast.
MM:	That must have been quite a journey every day.  Was there ever any opportunity to change to work nearer home or would you have wanted to?
EI:	 I wouldn’t want to.  There were more than me travelled from home and there was a bus for us for some of the way.  Our transport was all paid for.  
MM:	How long would it have taken you every day to get to work?
EI:	I’ve no idea now.  We went by train and the bus lifted us at the railway station.  
Going over the border was a day.  Whenever I left, they used to run trips every Wednesday across the border and you could get butter, tea, sugar whatever you wanted, as long as you were prepared to hide it and didn’t have it taken from you. 
MM:	Was this for the shop or just for the family?
EI:	For all concerned, if I had got a wee bit extra, well that was fine, but Lord rest my father, when he was living, he never would eat anything to do with what was brought over, he said you never knew where that was hidden!  They had ration books and you were only allowed 2oz. of butter and a quarter of margarine.  We got them from the wholesalers and they got their supplies from the government.  That’s all I could get – that was the rations for what ration books I had.
MM:	If you had extra to sell in the shop, would the local Food Officer have wanted to know where all the extra food came from?
EI:	Well, you never would have extra for the shop, it was all for your friends, below the counter.  
MM:	Was it just foodstuff you were bringing?
EI:	 You could bring [pause] I brought home, I remember I was in nerves the whole time - razor blades.  There was a shortage of razor blades and I brought home a box of razor blades and I had them in my pocket when the Customs men went round the train to search us.  
MM:	Would they actually do body searches?
EI:	Oh yes, they had ladies there for that.  They took the coat off me and I had the box of razor blades in the pocket.  They didn’t find them; one Customs man says to the other, that’s not a new coat and it was a new coat.  I’d left the old rag of a thing behind me in Dundalk.  
MM:	So you went to buy clothes as well?
EI:	Of course, you were only allowed so many coupons for good clothes.
MM:	I presume that because you had a better income from the NAAFI that you had more spending money.  Would you have had complete control over that yourself?
EI:	Well, I would always give Mummy my money when I got paid.  
(Indecipherable section of tape due to interference from gas fire – approximately three minutes.)
MM:	What about registration during the war?  Did you have to organise that for the shop customers?
EI:	Yes, we had a register.  Whoever was going round to do the registration and then you would get your ration book.  Nobody seemed to think about it, it just had to be done.  
(Another indecipherable section – less than one minute.)
EI:	I remember whole families being traipsed down the Glen Road and up in the hills.  I done it for a couple of weeks and then I got so tired having to walk away from Arizona Street down the Glen Road, down the Falls, away to the northern county and down to the railway station.
MM:	Was this when the air raids were coming?
EI:	When the air raids were coming, yes.
MM:	Were there any shelters you could have gone to?
EI:	There were shelters but they were very dangerous.  There was too many of them bombed.  
MM:	Would there have been any near Waterford Street?
EI:	There was one on Waterford Street, there was one on Madison Street.
MM:	Did people generally stick with their neighbours when they were looking for shelter?  Would you have met people from Bangor when you were sheltering there?
EI:	Well, we didn’t mix with them because the house that we got was away [pause] sitting outside Bangor, and we were just coming in and out.  You were too glad when another night finished that you just got into your bus to get back on to the train.  
MM:	Would you have thought of staying in Bangor to avoid all the travelling back and forth getting exhausted?
EI:	My mummy wouldn’t have liked it.  She wanted me home.  And the work wasn’t heavy, it was mostly brainwork and you got on with whatever was to be done and you just done it.  
MM:	Would you have helped her with housework when you got home?
EI:	Yes, and shopping and whatever else was needed.  We did it between my sister and myself.  
MM:	What about your brother?
EI:	Well, people didn’t have the money in those days to buy big loads of coal so the boys would weigh out coal – maybe a stone of coal in the shop.  That’s how you bought that.  
MM:	When your father died could your brother not have done the work in the shop?
EI:	No, he’d got married and he moved up to Cliftonville Avenue and there was a lot of bombs dropping around there.  
MM:	One of the good moves after the war was the slum areas that were so badly damaged in the Blitz had to be rebuilt immediately after the war and there was a big house-building programme.  Do you remember that?
EI:	Well they started building houses around the area and re-building the old shacks that were there and that made a big change to the people.  They had a bathroom, a water pipe inside and instead of going out to the yard to draw your water.
MM:	What kind of standard was the house you were in on Waterford Street?
EI:	It was terrible.
MM:	How many rooms did you have?
EI:	Well, we had two bedrooms and two rooms downstairs.  It was a small terrace.  Now, when you talk about a terrace, it was just like [pause] they were all the same.  You’d walk straight off the street and into a wee hall and off that was the scullery, with a wee room with a sink.  And the room off that might be no bigger than eight by eight and the two bedrooms upstairs and a toilet out in the back yard.  If you had a big family, which an awful lot of them had, they used one of the wee rooms downstairs as a bedroom.  There was boys maybe living upstairs and the mother and father had a room and then the girls were down in the wee room so that you only had the one room as a living room to do everything.  And when you opened the door from the street you were nearly in it.  
MM:	Would these have been built for mill workers?
EI:	These were all [pause] the whole Falls was like that so it wasn’t just for mill workers but everybody had those houses.
MM:	When the post-war building programme began, did it make much difference to the area?
EI:	The bombs had been dropped around one end of the Falls so those houses had to be built up and then developments started springing up around the outside of that area.  But families still stayed close together, like.  
MM:	In your home you had six children and the parents in the home.  I’ve heard that sometimes there were members of the extended family as well, if not in the house but very close by.  Did you have relatives in the area?
EI:	Two old aunts lived together, on my mother’s side.  On my father’s side, they were away up at Ardoyne and we didn’t see them so much.
MM:	Would they originally have been from the community near your mother’s family or was it she and your father who moved?
EI:	Well, they always lived in the locality.  
MM:	Other women have told me about the friendly relations in the areas, that people would help each other out a lot.
EI:	Oh yes, everybody’s door was open.  
MM:	Do you find that the community spirit is the same in this house?
EI:	No, my goodness, it’s quite different because you could sit here all day and nobody would come near you or at least, there’s a man and woman up the street, they’re both retired and they never pass the door but to call in to see if I was all right or if I want any messages.  But it’s not like the days gone by.  My son, after he got married, he lived out near Dunmurray and then he got a house the same as this up the street and now he’s living near Maghera.  It’s done him an all awful lot of good by going then because he was being transferred to Ballymena so if he of being still living here he would have to have moved out to go to Ballymena.  So he just has half the journey now where he used to travel to Belfast every day.  She still travels.
MM:	In terms of your own life, what are the most valuable lessons that you have learned, do you think?
EI:	Well, my friends [pause] always getting my money in the post office, wanting to save and get your money safe, not being silly with it.  I didn’t work that long in the NAAFI when my father died and I had a right few pounds saved.  
MM:	So you wouldn’t have been extravagant about spending on yourself?  Did you have a social life attached to the NAAFI?
EI:	Yes.
MM:	But you didn’t spend much money on it?
EI:	Not at all, you walked to everything.  We played tennis and camogie and I’ve still got a medal I got for that.  I got that in 1932 and I’ve still got that.  My grand-daughter, she’s playing down in Maghera and I gave her mother the medal and Louise plays it for the school.  She’s going to St. Catherine’s in Maghera and this year, if God spares her, to the Grammar School.  They don’t do the qualifying.  St. Patrick’s is the only one that does that so I give her mother the medal to keep it for her.  So she asked the mother to give her the medal, she wanted to show it to the teacher because she was playing camogie.  That weekend she was coming down here and she was showing everybody the medal so I said that medal is going to be lost and I’m going to take it.   
So I have the medal now.  I have it safe in my handbag, that must be a year ago, and so far as I know, the medal is still in the handbag.  I think the teacher nearly had a fit when she saw it was 1932.  We won the county championships [laughs].  
MM:	Congratulations, that’s a wonderful thing to have, to pass on to your family.  
EI:	Well I thought it was right in taking it off the child because I’d really given it to the mother.  
MM:	She’ll value it in the future.
EI:	She brought it into school to show the teacher and put it in her schoolbag and then she forgot to give it back to her mother.  
MM:	So, apart from playing tennis and camogie did you do anything else for entertainment?  Did you go to the cinema?  
EI:	Not very often.  We were more out doors, walking and going to ceilidhs away in Thomastown.  
MM:	How would you get to them?
EI:	Walk it.  
MM:	So you more or less walked everywhere?  How old would you have been at this stage?
EI:	I was well over twenty, probably about twenty five when I started going, myself and two friends, and then they went across the water to nurse.  
MM:	What about boyfriends?
EI:	I didn’t have time for boys, between working and playing.  I didn’t get married until I was thirty nine and I had two children.  I had just the two.
MM:	Going back to when you were single, how did you handle your wages when you got paid?
EI:	I’d give it to my mummy and she’d take so much for the house and put the rest in the post office.  
MM:	Did you have any spending money at all?
EI:	Oh yes.
MM:	And how would you have spent it?
EI:	On shoes – I walked that much [both laugh].  I could use a sewing machine so I always made a lot of things and they were much more reasonable.  One of the neighbours, she was at the stitching and she always talked about it, would I not get a sewing machine so I got a second hand sewing machine.  That done for years and years and she was a good sewer because she was used to it, in the factory, she was sewing garments.  I would have run up curtains or anything like that for the neighbours.  It was just a matter of one helping the other.  I remember this woman, her husband was going to a wedding and she had to [pause] she was getting him a suit of clothes out of the pawnshop, with the three brass balls.  You went with your parcel under your arm on a Monday morning and on Friday night, you went round and lifted it again when he got his pay.  So this night, Lord rest Annie Toner, she wanted his trousers shortened and I couldn’t do it because I had to go to the hospital, my husband had met with an accident, and Marie MacBride took on the job to shorten the trousers.  She put the trousers on him and she cut the trousers just to the length and forgot there was a turn-up to go in them and she made such a mess of the trousers that they called me back from the hospital because they said I was on expert on them.  I had to turn round and over-lock the piece of cloth and sew it back on again and make it into a double fold so it wouldn’t be noticeable at all.  Your brains told you what to do but you knew they were in trouble.
MM:	What about during the war, was it difficult to get material?
EI:	Well, when we were to go across the border, and it was very cheap excursion fare, you got to Dublin for five shillings return and you went to Clerys and there was another shop, you could get a bolt of material for maybe two and six pence, or a couple of shillings a yard, and you brought that back.  
MM:	So everyone who went to Dublin came back laden down?
EI:	Oh yes, they were well improved.  We had great fun going to Dublin.  Protestants, Catholics, Hindus, anybody was on that train for Dublin.  Monaghan was another place we went to, we went to three or four places along the border.  We used to go there in the car on a Sunday.
MM:	During the war?  Was the petrol not rationed?
EI:	You could always buy petrol coupons.  
MM:	Would this have been because you needed a car to run your business?
EI:	That’s right, you had to get the petrol.  
MM:	Would it have been easier or harder to smuggle things back from Dublin in your car rather than the train?
EI:	It was six of one and half a dozen of the other.  It depended on what customs men or inspectors were on duty.  I remember going up in our old car and I had bought a new pair of shoes and we were stopped and they took the shoes off me.  There was hundreds of people stopped and searched and things taken off them.  There was a lot of stuff got done on the side roads.  We always went the straight road, the main road.
MM:	What happened to the goods that were taken?
EI:	The customs, I think, would put them up for auction.  They auctioned them.  
(Indecipherable section of approximately one and a half minutes.)
EI:	If anybody made a pot of stew the stew was brought round.  You got your bowl and that’s the way it worked.
MM:	So in the sense that you all looked after each other extremely well, was there any feeling that was enough, that you didn’t need to organise politically to make changes for the better?  Were you or anyone of your friends and family involved in politics?
EI:	No.  We had a very good politician in the Falls during the war, Joe Devlin.  He got the hours cut for children in the mills.  I couldn’t tell you much about it but he ran an excursion for the children every year and the buses used to come to the Falls, to the Dunville Hall.  Every child got a ticket to go to Bangor; this was during the war.
MM:	Every child from the area or was there any kind of means test?
EI:	Well some people let their children go and others didn’t because he was a nationalist and some of them were republican.  So the republicans never let their children go.  
(Indecipherable section of approximately one minute)
EI:	People were all churchgoers then.  In those days, the priest didn’t get changed so frequently as they’re changed now so people knew them well.  
(Indecipherable section of approximately two minutes)
MM:	Were there many weddings during the war?
EI:	Ordinary weddings?  Yes.  You couldn’t get a house or anything so your mother would give you the front room.  There was no building then and even when they put up shelters and huts up the Springfield Road, it’s all built up now.  The people went mad then when the war was over to get these huts, the American huts.  They weren’t what you’d call houses but it done them for a cover.
MM:	Was the housing situation that bad?
EI:	The housing situation was very bad then.  After the war, then, they made them mixed localities before there was any [pause] before they’d move them from the areas.  And then the Protestants, they just started because they thought the Catholics were getting too much of their own way.  
(Discussion of the ‘Troubles’ from the 1970s onwards followed from this point in the interview.)
Emily, 30th November 1996

EI1

