Ethel Interview, Slane, Co. Meath on Tuesday, 5th July 2005.

EMcK:	  I’m Ethel M. but during the war I was known as ‘Paddy’, which was usual when you were Irish in England.  I was born and bred in Dublin, in Glasnevin – St. Mobhi Road.  I had two brothers and two sisters and I was the youngest of five.  We had a very happy home, we were an extraordinarily happy family.  Of course, everybody sat round the table for all the meals and I don’t know how my mother managed during the war, trying to work with turf in the stove.  She’d have to dry it at the side of the kitchen stove and then try to get it to burn.  At night time, when we’d have a cup of tea, the gas was off so we had a sawdust box and we boiled the kettle on that.  
MM:	Do you remember having fleas in the turf?  This was something I had never heard of until fairly recently.
EMcK:	  No.  I’d heard of them but we never had fleas.  But the turf was just so wet, it was just terribly wet.  I can see my mother still.  We had an Alco (?) stove in the kitchen and she would pile the turf around the side of it to get it dry before putting it back into the stove.  But we were never short of fuel – we either had some coal or we had the turf.  A lot of was dirty coal, with stones flying out of it.  We had very poor coal during the war but we were never short of that.
MM:	So you remember having coal all through the war?
EMcK:	 Well, I don’t remember us being out of coal.  We may have been but I wasn’t conscious of it.  We always had plenty of turf.
MM:	So how old were you at this time?
EMcK:	 I was seventeen when the war started and when I was twenty, I saw a picture in the Sunday paper – you know the way everybody reads the papers on Sunday – and I saw a photograph of a soldier being attended to by medical staff.  They were attending the soldier and I thought: you know, I could do that, if I couldn’t do any fighting.  Innocently, I always thought all soldiers fought.  I never thought of the other jobs that had to be done, such as cooks and office staff and that.  I just said to my mother: “I’m going to join up”.  She just said: “don’t be silly, nobody would expect you to do that”.  Being the youngest, I was very demanding, and I suppose I was used to arguing but for once, I just kept quiet and I thought I’ll be twenty one in February and there’s nothing they can do to stop me.  So I waited until I got over my twenty first birthday and it must have been about April or so, I suddenly decided I was going.  I got a day off from the office – I worked for G.A. Brittain’s, they were radio rentals people and that was the branch I was in – so I got the day off and I never told the family I was going to Belfast.  I just came back and said I’ve joined the W.A.A.F. [laughs].  
My boss was going on holidays in four weeks time for a fortnight and I was assistant manager, so I decided to wait the six weeks so that he could have his holidays before I went.  For that six weeks, my mother just burst into tears every time she looked at me.  Going off to lead a life of perdition, just to get away from me.  Oh, dreadful things were going to happen [laughs].  But once I went, once I was in, it was Monty and our Ethel won the war [both laugh].  So there was no problem with that.  My father’s brother was in the last war, he was the first war as well, both wars, so the history was there.  Another brother was in the army too.
MM:	Was there much discussion in the family about the course of the war and what was happening?
EMcK:  Oh yes.  We listened to every news bulletin that was going.  My mother used to hate to hear poor Churchill boast that they’d had a great day because she’d say there’d be a big raid after that and there usually was.  But funny, my daughter asked me not so many years ago did I ever worry that we wouldn’t win the war, but it never struck me.  I mean, I was quite sure that the Allies were going to win.
MM:	When you say ‘we’, that’s interesting because strictly speaking, we were neutral.  
EMcK:  But Hitler wouldn’t have thought that if he’d got into England.  That was my point, if he’d got into England, which he very nearly did, he’d have taken Ireland over straight away.  I haven’t read Mein Kampf, have you?  I think in it he refers to his taking Ireland – I’m not sure.
MM:	I haven’t read it.
EMcK: That’s why it just never struck me that we wouldn’t win.
MM:	Was it BBC radio you were listening to?
EMcK:  Yes.  It was the BBC that we listened to.  I mean, you just had to believe Churchill.  He was a character – he was just so different, you just felt while he was there everything was going to be all right.  He had a lot of faults but you were just confident when he was in charge.
MM:	Well, he was probably a good wartime leader, not so good in peacetime.
EMcK:  No, not in peacetime.  
MM: Would your neighbours have shared these sentiments?  How did they react to your joining up?
EMcK:  Nobody seemed to have objected it.  Whenever you were home on leave and you’d meet the neighbours, they’d say: Home again? When are you going back? Just the usual thing.
MM:  So when you went up to Belfast – you just got on the train and went to the recruitment office?
EMcK:  Well I just joined then and then after the six weeks I went up and I think there were thirty or forty of us all went over and we went to Heysham.  We sailed over to Heysham and I hadn’t a clue where it was, whether it was England or – at least, I knew it was England but not what part of England it was.  Then we were sent from there down to Wilmslow to do a month’s training.  
MM:  Were these all women who were with you?
EMcK:  These were all women.  
MM:  And were they from North or South?
EMcK:  Both.  There were a lot of girls from Jacob’s Factory.  They were characters and it was amazing when we got there, because of course, we all had to have medicals, and the number that had dirty heads.  They had to be put into a billet on their own.  You suddenly found there were a whole lot missing and then you heard where they were.  Or you’d wake up in the middle of the night and hear one of the Northern ones saying ‘have you got a connection?’.  [Laughs] They were looking for a light for their cigarette.  We never knew whether those Northerns were Protestants or Roman Catholics.  You didn’t think about it and you didn’t care where they came from – you were just one of the gang.
MM:  Before you went, were you given any idea of what kind of training you would get?
EMcK:  Well, when I went for my interview they asked me what my best subjects were and I had failed the Inter with honours [laughs] but I got Irish, which was unheard of in my school.  But Science and Maths and English were my favourites, and Mechanical Drawing.  So the Recruiter said : electrician.  I didn’t know they would have taken anything in as an electrician because they were trying to get them but I sailed through the exams because I enjoyed it.  It was so interesting.
MM:	What were you learning to do?  
EMcK:  Repair aircraft.  When you went in, there was a huge hangar with all little bays in it and the first one you went into – you know the little doorbells they used to have with the little battery under them in the hall – we learned to wire those first.  Then gradually [pause] when we went through the first time, they showed us all round and we ended up with bomb gear.  That, I thought I’d never get that but going through the separate stages each week, we were six months on that course and we had science classes as well with the officers.  It was only sergeants that thought us the basics.
MM:	So you were training for very responsible jobs?
EMcK:  We were really, but you never thought of that, you were just there doing a job.
MM:  So at this stage you were still only twenty one?
EMcK:  Yes, and of course, nothing is going to hit you at that age.  You’re going to live for ever and you never think of anything like that.  So I did six months on that course and then I went to Honeybourne, it’s near Stratford, and I was working on Whitleys then.  That was the Whitley aircraft – they were very light planes but the ones that I was working on, they used to go on what they called ‘nickel raids’.  This was strips of paper metal coated, like a ribbon of paper, and the Canadians were flying them, they used to fly over the Continent and throw these out and the metal used to distort the radar.
MM:  Would that be so fighters or bombers could get through?
EMcK:  Others would get through and the Germans wouldn’t know they were coming, it would confuse them.  So that’s what I was doing there.  Then [pause] from there I was sent back to Melksham – that was the Group 2 Electricians Course and I was sent on the first course for Group 1 Electricians.  
MM:  What did that mean for you?
EMcK:  [Laughs] Pay.  It was a more advanced course and we went back to Melsham for four months and we were very pleased with ourselves because we were the first ones who did the course.
MM:  The first women?
EMcK:  The first women, yes.  They’d only had men before that and so I did four months on that and then I was sent to Uxbridge.  But when we were working on the Whitleys, they’d had fixed undercarriages as far as I can remember and when you wanted to do repairs on them they weren’t up high enough and somebody would shout ‘two six’ and that’s a form to move anything in the R.A.F.  So when somebody shouted ‘two six’ on the hangar floor we would drop what we were doing, go out and get underneath the aircraft and bend down and then somebody would say ‘lift’ and we’d heave our backs up and lift the aircraft up and they had trestles that they stuck in at either end and to put the trestles in to hold it up.  
MM:	That was pretty different from office work.
EMcK:	 [Both laugh]  Quite different, but it was all fun.  You didn’t even have to work too hard.  Your meals were at certain times but if there was an extra job on you just stayed on.  There was no case of overtime or anything like that.  
MM:	When you went over first, where were you accommodated?
EMcK:	 In billets.  There’d be about twenty to a billet.  You just had a bed and a bomb box for your bits and pieces, and probably a cupboard over your bed that you could put things in.
MM:	Was this a sort of hut?
EMcK:  Yes, a wooden hut. But when I went to Uxbridge I was with what they called ‘works and bricks’, they were the civilian workers on the camp and it wasn’t [pause] there were no aircraft there.  It was in the town of Uxbridge and there I was working in the underground signals section.  It was where the planning for D-Day was done.  Churchill had a caravan there at one time but that was over – it was after D-Day when I was there.  The girls in the signals section were still down there and they were pushing aircraft around a table – you know you’d see the girls doing them in films – and I’d have to put these lights up in their offices.  I don’t know whether you’ve ever heard of ‘Catseyes Cunningham’, well I was sent along to his office one day because there was a bulb gone.  I walked in and he just took one look and he said ‘a girl!’.  He had a navigator with him and he said to the navigator ‘you get up and do it’ [laughs].
MM:	And at this stage you were a Group I Electrician?
EMcK:  Yes, I was a Group I at top pay [laughs].  So I was there for VE-Day and we had a great party for that but I was transferred [pause] I was posted then to Henlow in time for V.J. party, and we were working on Wellingtons there.  
MM:  They were much bigger, weren’t they?
EMcK:  Yes, but all these aircraft were just wooden, really, with cloth material stretched over them and when they came in they were easy to repair.  But the Wellingtons, you could get underneath them without lifting them so we used to do a daily inspection.  The rule for that was: kick it until you see if a wheel drops off. [Both laugh]  Actually, mostly we were taking chewing gum off the little lights where the signals were to show whether your engine was working, what the speed was, and everything.  They used to stick chewing gum on those so that there would be very little light coming in to them because when they were flying at night that would seem very bright to them.  So mostly you were picking chewing gum off them [laughs].  And we were changing batteries – great big twelve volt batteries – we had to haul them up and down.  We were strong.
MM:	You’d have had to be.  
EMcK:  Yes, but you just didn’t think about it, you just got on with it.  
MM:	Was there any kind of square bashing, or anything like that?
EMcK:   No, not there, although at Henlow we did.  We did a bit of square bashing there but the war ended in June and after that we had a lot of Mosquito aircraft to look after.  They were the most beautiful, next to a Spitfire, to me they were the most beautiful aircraft, and we were tropicalising them for the Middle East.  They were expecting the Jews, you see they were moving into Palestine, there was all that trouble going on and they were expecting great heat out there.  We were fitting these with rockets – I spent most of my time soldering the plugs for them to plug in the rockets.  But when we finished with the Mosquitoes, they just stayed around the airfield and they were never used.
MM:	That’s an interesting aspect – you’d been doing really important and responsible work but at the end of the war you ended up being deployed on machines that were to be used against the victims of the war?
EMcK:  Well, we never thought of them as victims at that stage.  They were blowing up the British army; the Jews were blowing them up so we didn’t think of them.  The army were our boys [laughs].  I never thought of them in that way.  It’s a different way of looking at it.  But I suppose you can see two sides of it.
MM:	I would see it as being a very bad situation that was made worse by the way the British government handled it.  There was a ferocious irony that a lot of the refugees, who had managed to survive the death camps, were then being put into camps in Cyprus.  It’s a complex question but it was just something that struck me when you were talking about your work.  Would you have had much discussion, say in your barracks at night, about the political situation?  Was it that you were getting on with the war and totally focussed on winning?
EMcK:  We didn’t really discuss it very much.  We all had [pause] I had a boyfriend who was out in Burma so that when this war was over, in Europe, I was waiting for him to come home because you had to wait until all that was over.  
MM:  It certainly strikes me that it some doing to go from being an office manager to joining the armed forces [both laugh].  You were saying that your mother would boast about you winning the war, which suggests she was certainly proud of you.  How much opportunity did you get to communicate from England?  
EMcK:  I was home every three months; we got ten days leave.  Don’t talk about the Irish Sea!  I was seasick so many times until Kwells came in.  I dreaded the journeys but I was home every three months, except around the time of D-Day and times like that when you would be stopped.  But we got leave all the time.  
MM:	You were called ‘Paddy’.  Was that linked with any anti-Irish feeling?
EMcK:  No, not at all.  Anybody who was Irish was called ‘Paddy’.
MM:  Did you meet up with any of the women that you went with initially?
EMcK:  No, I never met them.  I met one girl when we were rehearsing for the Victory Parade in 1946 [pause] you see, when we finished with the Mosquitoes I went in to the band, the station band, and then the central band was posted in and I got squeezed into that.  I couldn’t play a note on the trumpet when they came but the warrant officer just said ‘stand at the back, Paddy and keep blowing’ [laughs].  So I just kept blowing then and eventually I ended up on the big drum.  But we did a lot of travelling with that because we were recruiting and also, we were sent over to Liège in Belgium for their victory parade and we went to Germany twice and we travelled around Hamburg and Hanover.  In Hamburg, we did a march through the streets and it was just after the indoor tattoo for which we trained, the Royal Tournament [pause] and we did a fifteen-minute demonstration at that – we were the first women ever to appear in the Royal Tournament, that was it.  We were the first women on that and when we came back from our route march in Germany, in Hamburg, they asked would we do the demonstration piece.  Of course the heat was tremendous out there but we weren’t going to let them see us wilting so we went on and did our fifteen minutes of playing around and marching.  We thought they would laugh at us because they’re so keen on brass bands but I don’t think they had ever seen girls playing drums and trumpets before.
MM:  When you were saying you were recruiting [pause] this was after the war?
EMcK:  Yes, I didn’t go in to the band until the war was over.  
MM:  So who were you recruiting at this stage?
EMcK:  Well, we were recruiting, you see people were being demobbed, there were so many people being demobbed and there were so many still in the Far East and so many had joined like myself, as volunteers, they all had to be let out first.  I was just reading a booklet that somebody sent me and there were something like 250,000 WA.A.F. one year and within a couple of years there were 15,000.  I actually signed on for an extra two years because I was having such a good time.  I joined in ’43 and the war was over in ’45 and I wasn’t due to be demobbed until 1946, so then I stayed on and actually it was’49 when I came out.  I did enjoy it, yes, but I got to the stage when I thought ‘I’m doing everything automatically; I’m not thinking for myself at all’.
MM:  Well that’s part of the aim of the training, isn’t it, so that you’re not arguing about orders at a crucial time?
EMcK:  It is, but it just ended up that I thought if I don’t get out now, I’ll be in it forever.  They were turning the band into a brass band just before I left.  But the reason I would have been Group 1 electrician [pause] I was misemployed as a bandswoman but I got my first class pay as a bandswoman.  They were only Group 5 and I was Group 1 so I got much higher pay.  I must have had at least five shillings a week more, which was a lot in those days.  
MM:  Can you remember what you were paid when you went in?
EMcK:  I think it was about fourteen shillings a week but it was all found, your uniform and everything; you only used your civvies for coming home.  I was never short of money but as a family, we’d always had enough.  Whatever we had, it was enough.  It’s a great way to be brought up because you’re very careful of everything.  My mother, she always bought soap in advance so that it dried out hard because it lasted much longer.  So before my soap ran out I’d get another tablet and have it dry.  Just little things like that; that you would learn from your mother.  It’s quite soft when you get it first and it wears out quickly but if you have it for a few months, it gets lovely and hard and it lasts much longer.  
MM:  I’ve heard about having to wash your body in Sunlight soap, which would have been so harsh, but it seems that you just put up with it because you couldn’t get anything else.
EMcK:  Well, I know when I got married and went to move, there was Sunlight soap of my mother-in-law’s that had been there for years.  She’d obviously stacked it and it would last for ages.  It would be great to rub on the collars of shirts because you hadn’t got the same washing powders then.
MM:  It seems there was much more ingenuity then about making things do because of the shortages.
EMcK:  Yes, there was.  I used to bring back tins of stew to friends I would go to in Birmingham, for a long weekend, if I only had a 48 hour pass, and she would make at least two dinners out of one tin of meat.  She’d stretch it out with vegetables and when she hadn’t enough fat, she used to use liquid paraffin.  There was just some of that put into the pastry, you wouldn’t taste it and it could have had disastrous effects [both laugh] and it sounds awful.  I used to queue for her on a Saturday morning sometimes when it was her turn to have half a rabbit.  
MM:  Did you find that rationing was very much tougher in England than here in Ireland?
EMcK:  Oh it was dreadful.  I mean, we were all right, I was never hungry, but I brought home a week’s ration to my mother.  She had it on a plate to show everybody.   There was a slice of bacon and a little bit of butter, a bit of marg, more tea.  I used to bring tea from these friends in Birmingham and my mother would send back sugar because they were short of sugar.  
MM:  I have a photograph that I used in a lecture once, it was of one adult’s ration for a week, and it looked like what one person would use for a meal now.  
EMcK:  I must say we were well fed although the food was often murdered.  When you got soup, what was left over from the dried scrambled egg in the morning went into the soup and everything else went in on top of it.  But when you’re hungry, it doesn’t make any difference, you’ll eat it.  I can remember eating dry bread with Yorkshire Relish or something like that spread on it.  But we could always get something – if you were broke and you couldn’t go to the N.A.A.F.I. to buy something, you could get a mug of cocoa and a couple of slices of bread at nine o’clock at night in the Mess so we were never short.  
MM:  Well, I suppose it makes sense – if an army marches on its stomach – to keep you well fed so you could concentrate on what you were supposed to be doing.
EMcK:  Exactly, and of course, the civilians had a worse time.  It was extraordinary but the only time I was scared was when I was in Uxbridge and I was down in this underground, cellar sort of place and there was a big generator for generating the electricity.  We’d switch that off and go on to batteries because we’d have to test it and when you switched that off and it was quiet, the buzz bombs were going over and the chimney, a kind of ventilator that went up out of it, you could hear them go over and you just sat there and waited.  And then you’d hear them go off and it wasn’t beside you so that was all right.  
MM:  I can’t imagine being in that situation.
EMcK:  We used to go up to London at weekends and we’d stay in the Underground, the tube stations where you were miles down underground.  They had three-tier beds and you could get them for a shilling, I think, for the night.  But if you went to the Y.W. in town it was two and sixpence so if you were a bit short, you waited until they were full and you went to the Underground and you got it for a shilling.  And you got a cup of tea in the morning and a slice of Swiss roll.
MM:  That was kind of an unusual breakfast [both laugh].  Were you ever in a bombing raid?
EMcK:  No, I was lucky.  Well, we were in London when some raids were on but we were herded back out of it.  One night, I was staying with a friend who lived in London, and the next morning she said ‘were you scared last night?’ and I asked her why and she said ‘there was a shocking raid on’.  She and her mother-in-law didn’t know whether to come in and comfort me or not but I had slept through it all.  It was the same with D-Day.  Actually I was in Gloucestershire on a course for a week and D-Day came and I slept through it all.  When I came down in the morning another girl with me asked did I sleep at all last night, but I slept through everything.  And the planes roared over every night.  But from there I was sent back to Honeybourne and within a couple of weeks I was sent down on the Group 1 course and it was down near Salisbury Plains and at night, in the evening, you could see the planes coming back, these were Dakotas, towing two gliders, and these were all the wounded being brought back from France after D-Day.  I can still see the line of them going across the horizon, plane after plane with these gliders.  
MM:  Did you come into contact with German prisoners of war among them?
EMcK:  Well, I was there over four months but the only time I got a good view of a German plane was in Dublin.  We were living in Mobhi Road in Glasnevin and we were at breakfast and we suddenly dashed out when we heard this roar and a German place with the crosses underneath flew over the house, over towards Botanic Avenue and out towards the sea.  There was a Spitfire on its tail and the two of them roared over – that was the best view I ever got of an enemy aircraft [laughs].
MM:  I’ve spoken to people about the North Strand bombing in Dublin and they still have very vivid memories of it even though they were not personally affected but it made such a big impact on them.
EMcK:  There is a man that lives near here and he was in the North Strand bombing and the roof went and the wardrobe in his bedroom fell over his cot and saved him and Jimmy is still going strong.  
MM:  The houses really were just flattened.
EMcK:  They were.  I think that was the most scary night of my life because one of my brothers was in the A.R.P. and he had to go out and until he came home I was terrified.  
MM:  Another woman who has spoken to me remembered that they lived in Cabra when it happened and they could see the lights and hear the noise and see the flames shooting up even from that distance.  She remembers standing on the landing in their home and her mother putting her arms around herself and her sisters and saying ‘if we’re going to go at least we’ll all go together’ [both laugh].  She thought that wasn’t any consolation because she just didn’t want to go.  But she actually went to England and became a munitions worker after it.
EMcK:  So it didn’t scare her off.
MM:  No, in fact I think she probably [pause] she was doing really dangerous work and just took it in her stride.  Maybe you’re better able to do that when you’re young.  
EMcK:  Exactly.  You’re immortal at that age.
MM:  Were you working with women all the time?
EMcK:  No, we were mixing with men most of the time.
MM:  Did you ever hear remarks of the ‘this isn’t suitable work for women’ variety?
EMcK:  Only when I was helping to remake a path once from the electrical officers’ office over to the site office and we were digging a path across because there was only grass between them.  The lads were out there with pickaxes and I said let’s have a go.  I was out there and I’d never used a pickaxe before [pause] we weren’t digging out trenches, we were only more or less taking the top off but an officer passed by and said ‘take her off that pick’ [laughs].  That was the only time that they ever did and ‘Catseye’ was the only one who ever turned me down for an actual job.
MM:  What rank did you reach?
EMcK:  I got as far as corporal.  I went in as an ACW2 and then after my courses [pause] after my first course I came out as an ACW1.
MM:  So what did that mean?  Was it an increase in salary?
EMcK:  Aircraft woman – you go in as a two and then you get up to a one so I got that from my course.  I got good enough marks so I went straight on to a one then LAC – that was leading aircraft woman.  You had to sit your Board, that was just an examination and they asked you all sorts of questions from the course and then you got your LAC, which brings your wages up another little bit and then eventually corporal just came through while I was in the band.  I didn’t have to work for it.
MM:  So you didn’t have to supervise anybody
EMcK:  No, I didn’t.  But the women who did the group one course, they weren’t sent abroad.  I had a friend on the group two course and she was sent out to the Middle East and I was very envious.  But they wouldn’t let us go because apparently we were too precious.  
MM:  So they were saving you for more useful work?
EMcK:  That was the idea.  But then there was nothing more for me to do so that’s when I joined the band.
MM:  In the long term, was there pressure for you to get out at the end of the war because there wasn’t the same need for you anymore?
EMcK:  No, they were only too delighted for you to stay on.  Nobody wanted to go in once the war was over.  They wanted to keep what they could – they didn’t want all of them but there was no pressure on me whatsoever and then I said I didn’t want to sign on for another two years, it was fair enough.  But I was glad I hadn’t signed on any longer because my father died exactly a year later and I would have been coming home the night that he died.  It was just one of those things that happened and you see my eldest sister was married and had a small child, my next sister was asthmatic and she couldn’t go; my brother was an asthmatic and my other brother had just got over T.B.  So there was nobody else to go.  Not that any of them would have been interested in going because Arthur was a pacifist but after the North Strand, he joined the A.R.P. the next day because he realised that if he had been hit he would have accepted their help.  Leslie was already in the A.R.P. so they knew everybody in the neighbourhood and I didn’t know any of them.  I’d come home and they’d say: hello, you’re home again and I didn’t know who they were [laughs].  
MM:  So you were unusual enough in the neighbourhood that your fame had spread?
EMcK:  Yes, that’s right.  I can’t think of anyone else around who went though I did meet one girl when we were preparing for the Victory Parade.  I met a girl, Seymour, from Cremore – do you know the north side?  
MM:  I do, yes.  My mother grew up around there – on Alphonse’s Road.
EMcK:  I know Alphonse’s Road well.  Well, I met her when we were preparing for the Victory Parade at this big camp we were on.  So I said to her by the way, if you’re short an iron – you were only supposed to have one iron to a hut and you had to leave your cap to borrow an iron but we all had our own – so I said to her to come along to such and such a hut and she came along and asked to speak to Ethel Mahon and they said who?  So she said I was talking to her today and she said I could borrow her iron and they said what? So she said she’s Irish and they said ‘oh, you mean Paddy Mahony [emphasising the middle syllable]’ and she said ‘iron’ and they pronounce it ‘eye-on’ so they didn’t know what an iron was [laughs].  So we sorted the language out in the end.
MM:  So there weren’t that many Irish women around?  And yet there were tens of thousands who enlisted but probably more men than women?
EMcK:  Yes, definitely more men than women.  Funny, I did meet with a cousin of mine who was waiting to go out to India and I met with another fellow, Geoffrey Hinde, but when I met him I was only on my group two course and he was a corporal and he barely spoke to me and we’d been to school together [laughs].  
[Interference on tape made just over two minutes of interview indecipherable.]
MM:  Do you ever have reunions with the women you worked with?
EMcK:  Not now, because I can’t fly any more.  But I’m still in touch with some of them and I was at a reunion about six years ago.  But after the war, I went to one – it was after I was married and it was nineteen years before I got back and it was a most marvellous day.  It was in Eileen’s house and I just walked in and they weren’t expecting me because they always kept somebody as a surprise.  And they just said “Paddy” and I was made so welcome.  I wasn’t anybody’s wife or anybody’s daughter or sister, I was me, and it was really marvellous.  It’s nice to be yourself once in a while.  
MM:  Had the other women been musicians before they went into the band?
EMcK:  No.  Actually Eileen had been a hairdresser before she went into the band.  Well, you see, when we started in the band first, when we weren’t working and the band hadn’t anything to do, we went back to our old trades.  We’d go back and work; there was always work to do.  I can’t remember how long we were going back to our old jobs for, not for too long because then we were away so much.  When we were doing a recruiting drive in Cardiff and we were supposed to speak to the people but most of them were so drunk they couldn’t get up to the stage.  
Another camp we were on, it was at Honeyborne and it was a big sprawling camp.  We slept in one site and we ate on another and the working area was another – there were three sites.  So we all had bicycles and we got a new C.O. and he didn’t like the cyclists going at lunchtime cycling along the road to the Mess, because it was holding his car up.  So he told us we had to march from the working site to the Mess.  Like that, the word went round.  You didn’t hear anybody complaining or anything but we all formed up and we all marched up to the Mess for lunch but we didn’t go in [laughs].  We dispersed and then, when the time was up, we marched back to camp again.  There were cars flying up and down; they’d all this scrambled egg on their hats and they didn’t know what to do about it.  They didn’t know whether food produce it again that night for supper or not.  So we kept it up and the next day the order was rescinded.  You could smell fish for miles around because they’d cooked all this for lunchtime and nobody to eat it.  
MM:  That was a clever move – the point was made but face was saved as well because you didn’t say anything.
EMcK:  Exactly.  We didn’t mutiny, we didn’t break any rules, we just didn’t eat [both laugh].  
MM:  Was there much of that sense of, you know, we’re in it together [pause] it sounds almost like there was unspoken communication in that incident.
EMcK:  Yes, though at Honeyborne, there were Canadians flying the planes and there was an unwritten law that we didn’t go out with the Canadians.  We only went out with the lads that we worked with.  You see, they had much more money and the girls went mad for these Canadians, or if there were Americans around they’d want to go out with them, so we wouldn’t go out with them.  There was a real fellowship, you see, you just didn’t do it.  It was amazing.  Going back on the group one course, we had these wooden billets and there was just a fence with three strands of wire along it and the men were in the next plot and there were some Americans there and they wouldn’t believe it that the W.A.A.F. billets were beside the men’s billets and there weren’t guards on.  I mean it just wasn’t done.  I was thinking, when I was thinking about you coming, there was very little bad language.  There was nothing like there is now.  A ‘bloody’ or ‘hell’ was the worst of them.
MM:  There seems to have been a big difference in attitudes.  A woman I was talking to said that even if you knew nothing about uniforms you could always tell the difference between the British and the American soldiers because the British always seemed to be at attention while the Americans would be slouching over their jeeps and were much more casual.  I’ve seen an American handbook for the troops who were billeted in Northern Ireland and they were advised to be very careful about how they treated local women because the sort of casual relations that they might have been used to at home would not be accepted here.  You might have to ask a father’s permission to go out with his daughter.
EMcK:  They didn’t understand that, but we did a recruiting drive in Belfast and it was the first time my mother saw me in uniform.  She and my sister came up to see me.
[Interference on tape for three minutes – interview incomprehensible.
Mrs. McKeever produced some photographs of the band and of herself, holding her bass drum.
MM:  What’s the skin [looking at photograph of EMcK in uniform with drum] – oh, it’s a leopard skin.  
EMcK:  Yes, it was a full leopard skin.  All the drummers had leopard skins.
MM:  I presume you were better prepared for this [heavy drum] after carrying the heavy batteries?
EMcK:  Yes, we were very fit.  We did the Lord Mayor’s Show twice but one of the times we did it, I was carrying the drum and we were marking ‘at ease’ and I had the drum on my hip and I swung it round to put it on the other side to keep the wind off.  It was bitterly cold because it was November but the drum slipped and clattered to the ground and everybody whispered Paddy Mahon has fainted.  You see when you were about to start a tune, the drum major would put her mace up and I’d give two taps on the drum and then they’d all get ready.  They would count five and then start playing.  So when the mace went up the drum came on again they were all whispering ‘she must have come to again’ [laughs].  It was heavy.  The strap went round your neck and round your back and then buckled round your waist.  
But we did this big show in Glasgow, in the Kelvin Hall, all the services were there because they were recruiting for everything.  The Red Cross and John’s Ambulance had stalls there and I came out with my drum through a doorway when we had finished our show and I tripped on one of these mats that the gymnasts jump on and I fell.  The drum came up and slit me under here [indicating chin] it was only a little slit but the blood poured out.  They tried to pull the drum off me but you had to click a little thing to get it out so they took me over to one of these stands, John’s Ambulance or something, and the blood was pouring down over my shirt and tunic and a woman said ‘excuse me, is this a demonstration?’ [laughs].  She must have thought they got somebody’s throat cut every night.  It was a very minor cut but it bled heavily.
MM:  That was your war wound?
EMcK:  It was – that was my war wound [both laugh].  The pipers had very narrow drums and when they’d move them, they’d swing them but we – it was more complicated, and you were going all the time.
MM:  Why were you assigned to that?
EMcK:  The base drummer got married and she had gone to Australia so they needed a new base drummer.  I volunteered for the job.  I’d learned to play the trumpet so I didn’t think it would be difficult.
MM:  Did you ever get to use the trumpet very much?
EMcK:  Well, there were very few of us knew the ‘Last Post’ and ‘Reveille’ and two of us went along to the officers’ mess one night to learn to play those.  So I’d be playing my bass drum, whip it off, grab my trumpet and go along to the officers’ mess.  We went in and we played ‘Officers dress’ and then we played ‘Officers mess’ as they’d go down to dinner.
MM:  I never realised there were tunes for such things.  I’d heard of ‘Reveille’ and the ‘Last Post’ but nothing else.  
[Indecipherable section of tape of approximately three minutes.]
EMcK:  The drummers had little leopard skin aprons.  That’s me behind the big drum (indicating one of the photographs).  There was to be a big celebration parade and there was no band available in Edinburgh so they sent us off and Eisenhower was supposed to be inspecting us.  But someone said that he looked at us and said ‘they’re just girls’ and walked on and never inspected us!  I never had time for Eisenhower after that.  This book was sent to me (indicating commemorative volume) and that’s Eisenhower and us passing him but he didn’t consider that we were important enough to be parading in front of him.  
[Indecipherable section of approximately one minute.]
EMcK:  When I was in national school I would like to have been a school teacher because then I could use the cane [laughs].  I don’t think it did us any harm at all.  I went to school in Lindsay Road in Glasnevin.
[Next ten minutes of tape devoted to general discussion about current affairs in Ireland.]
MM:  There doesn’t seem to have been any resentment at the level of ordinary English people of Ireland’s neutrality, despite what British government figures might have been saying.
EMcK:  I can only remember one incident when there was this woman in the band and she always referred me as the bloody Irishwoman but it wasn’t meant in a nasty way.  I never took exception to it – it wasn’t meant as a slur, she was just a rough type and that was the way she spoke.  I didn’t meet any Irish fellows either in the service.  I knew a lot who joined and I knew one man who was killed but wherever I was there just didn’t seem to be many Irish.  But then – call me a snob – but if you met somebody Irish abroad you would avoid them.  You wouldn’t bring them home for tea on a Sunday as you would recognise that accent.
The Warrant Officer that was in charge of the station band that I went into, he was in the British army that was stationed in Cork in the early twenties and they were among the last to leave.  He said to me that they left a grenade in the mess and the next lads that came in, they’d be blown to pieces.  [Laughs]  He thought that was funny.  
MM:  It seems a little strange to me that you still identify much more with Britain, even though you have always lived in Ireland.  Would your husband have had that kind of identification as well?
EMcK:  He would love to have joined up but he was lame.  A pony fell on him when he came home from boarding school.  He took his pony out and it was too fresh and it threw him and then fell on him and he broke his hip.  There wasn’t enough room for his leg to grow in the calliper so it ended up shorter than the other.  He could bend his knee but he wasn’t mobile enough and he couldn’t get in.  His best friend was in the Marines and how he envied him.  He would love to have been in the army.
MM:  Did you meet after the war?
EMcK:  I met him after the war, yes.  Two of his brothers – one was in the Navy and one was in the Air Force – so I suppose it was a Protestant thing in a way. 
MM:  Not necessarily.  A lot of research recently shows that a lot of Catholics joined up too.
EMcK:  A daily woman that I had in Fennor [Mrs. McKeever’s former home], her husband and her sister’s husband had both been in the R.A.F. but they reckoned it was because they hadn’t got a job.  
MM:  I’m sure that was a factor too.  It’s one of the interesting aspects of Irish recruitment that motives for joining up were so varied.  The Irish army certainly expanded significantly during the Emergency, both in terms of employment but also because people were conscious of the potential danger of invasion.
EMcK:  Now Fennor, that hill that you came down coming into Slane, a fellow that I knew, he was in the Irish Army and he was on duty on that bridge, on our land, when they were waiting for the Americans to invade.  At one stage they were expecting the Americans to come in.  They were more worried about the Germans because we were the back door into England.  But it was Americans that he reckoned were going to come in, not the British.  
MM:  When you talked about your war experiences with your children when they were young, were they interested in your stories?
EMcK:  No, but then I wasn’t interested in listening to my father talking about how he was born in Roscommon and then lived in Sligo and around there.  I wasn’t interested in listening to his talk at all and I hear names now and I remember that he told me about people down there, in the big house and that sort of thing, and I never listened.  Parents are old [laughs].
MM:  I have to say it’s only in recent years that I listen to my mother either [both laugh].
EMcK:  You’re busy with your own thoughts and you’re terribly important and they’re past it, no matter how young they are.  My grandmother came from Clonmel but her husband was Scottish but we never knew any of his people.  My name was Mahan but my grandfather went into the police and they put through his papers as ‘on’ and he never changed it.  But he had five or six brothers that went to New Zealand and they’re ‘ans’ out there.  I was there, about twenty years ago I took a trip out there, and I was asked why was it changed, was it a mixed marriage or something like that.
MM:  Of course, the ‘on’ is very much the Irish version.
EMcK:  Yes and I told them it was just a mistake in the police and they were amazed.  
MM:  Was this the R.I.C.?
EMcK:  It was the old R.I.C., that’s right. In fact, my grandmother was the teacher in Flower Hill School in Navan and my grandfather was stationed in Oldcastle but they had known each other from Roscommon.  Both their families were from Roscommon.  It’s a small country and everybody always knows somebody else.  
You see I didn’t really do anything exciting.
MM:  Oh you did.  Just going off to war at all.  There was still this idea when the war broke out that the woman’s place was in the home so any young woman who said well I’m not settling for that and I’m going to do something for myself or others, it was pretty brave.  Particularly in wartime, when there was no compulsion on you to get involved.  
EMcK:  You know it’s not so long ago that somebody asked me why did I join up and I said I didn’t want to see the Nazis coming here.  He looked at me and said he had never thought of that – he just thought I was joining up for England and the English are dreadful.  If you ask them why they hate the English they can’t tell you, or they’ll talk about the Famine but they forget that some of the Irish were landlords too.  But it must have been around that time that my grandfather’s brothers went out to New Zealand.  
Funny, he believed in the fairies and he didn’t drink and he read the Bible to the family every night.  Like the way people used to say the Rosary every night but how many families do that now?  But he was on duty one night and the sergeant was with him and they were looking over a bridge and they could see these little things dancing round a tree – they believed it.  But Susan [Mrs. McKeever’s daughter] said one of the vets was telling her that his child said well, you told me about the fairies, and you told me about Santa Clause, now when are you going to tell me about God? [Both laugh]
MM:  Not much of an answer you can give to that [laughs].
[At this point, Ethel’s housekeeper brought in tea and the interview ended.]

Ethel Interview, 5th July 2005




EM 1

