Flora, Belfast.  Interview: 30th November 1996

F:	I was born during 1918 and I was 42 years in Woolworths and I worked all during the war.  
MM:	And have you always lived in Belfast?
F:	Always Belfast.  I was born in the Stranmillis Road.
MM:	Did you go to school there?
F:	I went to school in St. Johns Public Elementary School on the Springfield Road.  I left school at fourteen believe it or not, in 1932 I left.  I was born in 1918 and I left school in 1932 and then I went to tech at night and I did all right there.  So then I was a supervisor in Woolworths for 42 years.
MM:	Did you go in as a supervisor?
F:	No, I went in as a counter girl then I was promoted to charge-hand and then supervisor.  I was supervisor for quite a few years before I left.  I’m eighteen years retired nearly.  I retired when I was 60 - just before I was 60.
MM:	So when you left school at fourteen, you went into Woolworths as a counter girl?
F:	No, I went into Woolworths when I was nearly eighteen.  
MM:	This was being in the tech?
F:	I was just at home really then from when I was fourteen to eighteen and then I went into Woolworths just as a counter girl.  Then I was made peFanent in 1937 and from counter girl, then charge hand, then supervisor.  That was it.
MM:	When you started as a counter girl, what sort of duties did you have?
F:	Just serving the customers and that, you know.  In those days, in my day, my younger days, I mean there was nothing over sixpence as you know, in Woolworths in those days.  You just served.  And you got to know your customers coming in.  And there was three and four girls to a counter in those days.
MM:	Where was this?
F:	In High Street, High Street Belfast, that was one of the big superstores and then there was a smaller one in North Street but I had nothing to do with it.  It was quite a responsibility, like, being a supervisor and you had to order merchandise for your Department and that.  But again, I have quite a good pension from it now.  They’ve been very decent.  Now Kingfisher have taken it over now, it’s not Woolworths any longer and Kingfisher have taken it over and all us pensioners, a few years ago got a big increase, according to your service and your age.  So I’ve got quite a wee bit, I’ve got £127, nearly £128 a month.  I get that as a pension, over and above my own State pension.  
MM:	Were you well paid while you were working there?
F:	Woolworths was reckoned as one of the best paid firms and when I reached eighteen [pause] when I was twenty one, I got 27/6 per week, which was big money in those days.  That would be about 1939 and as I say, 27/6 was a terrific wage because things were very cheap in those days.  Now, when I came out as a supervisor in 1978, my wages were, in my hand I had £45 in my hand.  Well, when you compare that to today, an ordinary counter girl [pause] of course, things are an awful lot dearer now but a counter girl today is getting £150 and I had the responsibility of a whole big section, maybe about eight counters and hundreds and hundreds of pounds, giving change out to staff and all.  When you look at the responsibility we had, you know, we were very poorly paid when you think of today.  
Now, whenever I worked in my day, in my early days, there was 432 staff in Woolworths.  They had a strike here about three years ago and there wasn’t a 100 of them.  They’ve cut down staff so much.  Now you go in now [pause] not that I’m in Woolworths very often but a girl friend and I worked together and we meet every fortnight and go in and have a cup of coffee or something and a bit of a chat, and Sally and I many a time we talk about it.  Sally retired a year or so before me but when we think of the responsibility and the work we had [pause] you look around you know and you can’t even see a supervisor.  Honestly, you can’t see anyone to ask even for directions.  In those days, we knew the number of every counter in the store and if a person asked you for anything - people are short sighted and all, you realise that as you get a bit older, are short sighted and can’t see too well, can’t hear too well, and you see these young ones and it’s up here or down there [laughs].  I remember many a time I used to say, not that I was terribly hard to work for, but I used to say remember people are older and they can’t always see and sometimes they can’t hear or they can’t see too well and you must understand that up there or down there is not enough.  You tell them the number of the counter and exactly where to go.  
But in those days you could have bought a yard of ribbon if you wanted a yard of ribbon.  Now, it’s multi pack and if you want a pink ribbon you have to take three or four yards of it.  
Well it was [pause] well you had great times, you know.  Everybody worked very hard and everybody was very dedicated to their job.  Not too much now - we notice it now, us older staff, when you go in [pause] any shop, it’s not just Woolworths but they couldn’t care whether they serve you or not.  I mean there’s an awful difference in the staff today and the staff in our day, because we needed it, we needed the money in those days.  Jobs were very hard to come by in my younger days and when you had a job, you sort of stuck to the job.
MM:	Would your family have been dependant on your wages coming in?
F:	Well, I would say yes, every penny was needed at home.  Now, not so much now, I look at my nieces and nephews, it’s not £1 or £2 for any of them. We had to walk everywhere.  They have everything.  They have washing machines, they have tumble dryers, they have fridges and fridge freezers, you name it; they have everything.  We didn’t have those things and they say they were the good old days!  I think if you look back they were the bad old days.
MM:	When you started work, what time was that?
F:	Nine o’clock, it was nine o’clock in the morning and we finished at half five.
MM:	Used you walk to work?
F:	No, you took the transport; you took the bus, but bus fares and all that wasn’t that expensive then.  I wasn’t always living here then, I was living in the Springfield Road and well, you’d have got by I suppose for 1d or 2d, you know, in the mornings.
MM:	Did you come home at lunchtime?
F:	Well, we had a canteen and you bought your lunch and it was reasonable for staff, we got it at a reduced rate.  Before the canteen was there we used to go down, there was a cafeteria then and we used to go down to the cafeteria and you’d have steak and kidney pie or chips or something like that, for a snack.  Well, you could get that for a couple of shillings, you know.
MM:	What about during the war, with rationing?
F:	 Well now, we weren’t too bad now during the war.  Of course again, my Mummy particularly, got things on the black market - everything was paying extra money, for eggs and butter, and things like that you needed.  Essentials, and tea I can remember, and tea, and I can remember going to Rome in 1957, was it, we went to Rome and they were delighted with the tea.  And that’s how we paid our way with a half pound of tea and they were delighted. To give them a half pound of tea was a novelty to them, you know.  
But I don’t think I would like to repeat those days again.  I mean, you had a bomb scare and next thing you were told to get out.  You had a certain point to go to and you could be there, you could stand for two hours.  I was on the ground floor and the paint was upstairs, directly above where I was, and they’d put the bomb in the paint so it would burn through.  And if I’d been standing where I was a few minutes before I would have been gone but as I say, we just had time [pause] and it was during the stock taking time and we were all taking the stock in.  Somebody came up and said there was a bomb scare, you’d better get out, so then the supervisor came up and said you’d better get out quickly.  We just had time to run across the stock room, down the back staircase and in to Anne Street.  We’d just got out of Woolworths when the bomb went off.  The place was wrecked.  Now I had three different experiences like that.  
But during the war, from 1939, when you were at home, there was bomb scares at night.  And I can remember us going up the Springfield Road, my mother and father, Lord have mercy on them, we got up the Springfield Road and I remember my mummy saying there’s bombs falling, the Germans are bombing.  We got as far as the Mount Mullen, it’s all built up now with houses, we got as far as the Mount Mullen and we were glad to sit down there and then my daddy had to go and find this man that he knew and see if we could get a place off him to sleep there at night.  That could happen maybe two or three, maybe four nights in the week and there was another night, I remember, and my mummy had got new shoes and you know the way you’re trying a thing on, she was trying them on and the sirens went over.  There was a bomb so out we had to go and we walked the whole distance, for about four miles, up the Springfield Road away to the quarries and my mother had the new shoes on and I remember her saying: I’m crippled with these shoes.  She just had to [pause] and we got so frightened, so scared with the bombs dropping that we were up and away.  But you couldn’t go through all those things again.  
When I think of it now, that you’re working and bombs go off and we always had to make sure we’d put away all the money and lock the registers and all that sort of thing.  The supervisors were always last to go and customers would be jumping over the counters and everything.  I mean you couldn’t go through all these things now.
MM:	Do you think you were able to be calm during the Troubles because you’d been strengthened by the experience of the war?
F:	I don’t know.  I think maybe I’m that wee bit stronger.  I mean I’d take risks now.  I was in town this morning – I’m not long home.  I was meeting my friend that her and I worked together and she lives in the Antrim Road so we meet in town now and have a cup of coffee and a bit of a chat.  But my sister, she rarely ever goes out, she’s afraid to go out.  Her daughter takes her out in the car to do her messages whereas I would take the risk.  I would just go out and get a taxi.  But I do go earlier in the morning now.  I wouldn’t be down waiting for the bus, you know.  But when I think of how active I was now when I was working [laughs].
MM:	Do you think conditions are easier now?
F:	Well, in those days, you needed your job and you just had to take a risk and go out, you know.
MM:	Would you have felt like that during the war years too?
F:	I was living with my parents, thank god, during the war [pause]. It was the 1950s when they both died.  I was living with them but in house alone [pause] I did a lot of voluntary work with the Credit Union and I was working in the Credit Union when all of a sudden the lights went out.  It was a bomb and it hit the transformer or something.  When I came down, there was no light.  I couldn’t even see where I was going it was that dark and when I came to my house, we had a sitting room and two windows down stairs and two up and there wasn’t a window in my house.  It was wrecked.  So the Credit Union boys, decently enough, came down and they started all they could do to cover the windows and they asked would I be all right.  I said I’d be all right [laughs] actually, I had a nice electric blanket and I’ll go and switch that on.  When I got into bed the bed was freezing, no electric blanket and I couldn’t even make tea, there was no electric, no anything.  So then eventually, the Housing Executive came then and boarded up all the windows and that but one night when I was up visiting my sister and she said sleep over in the baby room but I needed to get to work in the morning so I left.  And there was this lady who came in from next door and she said where are you going?  I said Springfield Road so she said I’ll give you a lift, so she gave me a lift to the top of the street and I walked down and I was the only one on the street that night that wasn’t burned out.  There was a man across the street from me and he said, you’ll be all right, I’ll tell the army and the army will keep an eye on you.  So with that two or three soldiers came up and they said where do you sleep and I said I sleep in the front room.  They said well we’ll keep an eye but I didn’t realise that Mr. Conlon and I were the only two who got any sleep that night.  
But you couldn’t do those things now.  I don’t think the neighbours would let me do those things now.  But as I say, you needed your job, and you just had to take a chance.  But it was dreadful when you had to get out and you were standing in all weathers, you had to get out because of a bomb scare.  Maybe not in our particular store but in the vicinity and sometimes you’d be put out and it would be very frustrating in those times, you know.  But on the whole, we got through it but I wouldn’t like to be doing it again.  
MM:	While all this was going on during the war and you were out at work during the day, would you have been expected to help with housework when you got home?
F:	Yes, you had to; you had those things t do.  Wednesday was your half-day then, you got a half-day on Wednesday and Wednesday was cleaning day and scrubbing day.  You started upstairs and came downstairs.  
MM:	Did you have any sisters and brothers?
F:	I had one brother and one sister.  Well my sister’s married now.  But boys didn’t do very much then.  Men didn’t do very much.  My daddy wasn’t too bad like, my daddy used to open every door in the house like; you were freezing when he was cleaning up, you know.  So you would just tell him to sit down and leave it alone.  But you couldn’t, you just had to do all those things.  You had to work and you had to keep house and do everything and as I say, your parents were waiting on the money.  Every penny was needed then because [pause] I handed up my wage packet.  
I can remember one Christmas Eve, in those days you worked until all hours and I can remember a Christmas Eve and I was coming out of Woolworths, this was in my very early days, I was very young at the time, I was only a counter girl.  One o’clock on Christmas morning and rather than break my pay I walked the whole way from Woolworths to Springfield Road.  And my mummy nearly [pause] why, she said, why didn’t you take a bus?  I said I had no money.  I didn’t want to break my pay.  It wouldn’t matter, she says, a penny or whatever, and I walked the whole way home and I got into the house at nearly two o’clock in the morning and ended up with the flu.  But as I say, you needed every penny and the very first year that I worked in Woolworths, my first Christmas, and when you think of it, you wouldn’t do it today.  You started at nine o’clock in the morning and you worked then to half past ten or eleven o’clock at night all during the Christmas period and you got a quick cup of tea over at the tea-bar.  A cup of tea and a biscuit about half four and that was you until you come home and my pay, working all those hours, was 18/11 into my hand.  
MM:	Did you not get a Christmas bonus?
F:	They gave you a bonus after the first year.  You started off with £1 and every year you got ten [pause] fifty pence now, it used to be ten shillings.  Well they put that in our wages with the result that they took income tax off it.  There was one year, I had two pound something, but the tax was gone off it.  They should have given you a Christmas bonus as a cheque separately.  I mean I wasn’t the only one complaining, everybody complained.  
MM:	Did you have a union to take up complaints?
F:	They didn’t have the union until later but the union was very good.  Then it got better and the Co-operative upped their wages and at one stage the Co-op had more than we had and so then there was a strike.  But it wasn’t until there was a strike at Woolworths because the Co-op was getting more and it was in England the strike was, but the particular manager we had [pause] it was up the manager, the manager could have promoted you or demoted you.  I had added responsibility; when I went in first I had responsibility for the toiletries section but then they asked me to take another department and he said, the deputy manager was a very nice fellow, and he said are you not getting any more money for this and I said no, I don’t think so.  And he said you should get more money so I went in to the manager and I said to him, I’m getting extra responsibility and I’m not getting any more wages.  He said why do you think you’re entitled to it and I said I’m getting added responsibility and I think I’m entitled to more money.  So he came back to me the next day and he said to me he’d give me [pause] he offered me five shillings.  I said I wouldn’t be satisfied with five shillings because the income tax would take it anyway.   So the next day he said to me I’ve reconsidered and I do think you’re entitled to a bit more and I’ll give you seven and a sixpence and I’ll backdate it.  So the next day he took me aside and he gave me an envelope and said I didn’t want the income tax taking it from you and what had he given me but fifteen shillings.  Two weeks, and I’d had the responsibility for two months!  But when you look back you tolerated a lot in those days that you wouldn’t tolerate now.  The young girls now wouldn’t put up with that.
MM:	Was it because you were worried about keeping your job?
F:	You needed your job so therefore you had to just tolerate it.  They went out on strike then, as I say, in England and this was then how we all joined the union.  So we joined the union because they upped our wages then, we got the increase, and they upped it to the same as the Co-op, maybe about a shilling over the Co-op.  But at the time, that wasn’t too bad but when you look and think of how hard you worked in those days.  
Now we used to have to [pause] well, there was no escalators and all sorts now that we didn’t have in those days.  When I look back, many a time, when you finished at night from Monday to Friday, from Monday to Thursday you finished at half five.  Six o’clock in those days and on Friday, half past six.  That extra half hour was a [pause] well on Saturday night, you worked to half past nine.  Half past nine was closing time for the shop.  We were told to carry stock then, down to the counters because there was no lifts, as I say, in those days.  The stock room was on the fourth floor and maybe you had a load of stationery, which was heavy books and exercises and all that to carry or maybe crockery, and you had to carry that from the fourth floor down to the ground floor and maybe the well would have went then when you were half there, you were half way up the stairs and the bell would have went to go home at ten o’clock and you were lucky to get out at ten o’clock or half past ten on a Saturday night.  It was really hard work, really you know.
MM:	What sort of holidays did you get?
F:	 In those days, we only got one fortnight’s holidays in the summer.  If you were a junior, younger, well you maybe got your holidays in May and you just had to take it.  As I say, you had to bite your lip because you needed your job.  Well, that went on then and we only got a half-day on Wednesday.  When you had up to ten years service you got an extra week, a winter week as they called it but you had to have ten years service before you got that.  Sure then it went on to five years service and then you got a wee bit of spring, or the winter as I’d call it, and a wee bit in the autumn.  You had four weeks holidays then by the time I left it.  But things were improving as I left.
MM:	When you were working there was it all female staff with you?
F:	It was all women, well there was men in the stockroom, men looked after the stockroom.  All female counter girls and all female office staff but in the stockroom, it was men who handled all the heavy trucks and that you know.  
MM:	Could you have moved over to the office if you had wanted to?
F:	You could have and you could have started as office staff, in those days.
MM:	What about the management – were there any women managers?
F:	Well, our managers now were all men.  In the strike, I think it was in 1967 there was a horrible manager then, Mr. Scott and they went on strike over him because I believe he treated the staff very badly.  This Mr. Scott was terrible.  If he didn’t like the colour of your hair or the colour of your eyes he sacked you but the others were all right.  I’m retired since 1978.  I had mixed feelings about retiring at the time – I thought I was going to miss it, because you do make friends and that, good friends and so I had mixed feelings about leaving it and retiring.  But I adjusted myself in about a month’s time or so, it wasn’t too bad, but for the first month it was long enough and I didn’t where I was going but then my niece, she had a young family and I started occupying myself looking after her children and that type of thing.
MM:	So after all your years of hard work, you started doing voluntary work when you retired?
F:	That’s it [laughs], I did voluntary work in the Credit Union.  I must have been about twelve years doing that when I was working – two nights a week I did.  Tuesday night, I was on the loans, I gave out the loans and that, and then on Thursday night, the committee all met on a Thursday night, so I did that two nights a week as well as working.  I thought nothing of it.  I couldn’t work in the Credit Union now because it’s all computers and that now, it’s all automatic.  But I liked it, really; I did that for years.
MM:	Going back a bit, during the war years what did you for entertainment when you weren’t working?
F:	Dancing.  I was a dancer in my day [laughs].  I was a dancer and many a time, many a week I was four nights dancing until one o’clock in the morning and daddy was a very strict man, and I would say the dance is on until twelve and he’d say you be home here at twelve.  Well, in those days there were no taxis and you walked everywhere and it was quite a wee distance.  I used to dance in a club, which was in King Street, the centre of the town and I had to walk to Springfield Road.  You thought nothing of it and I was out Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights, the three nights and if there was anything special on I’d be out on a Wednesday night and I was dancing until one o’clock in the morning.  I wouldn’t dare to say I was tired the next morning but I was called because I had a job to do and there was no use complaining.  But that was my entertainment, dancing.
MM:	When you were out dancing, did you come across American soldiers or sailors?
F:	There were a lot of Americans.  The Americans were here and I didn’t bother very much now.  They used to come into the shop but I never went out with them but there was a lot of girls did go out and a lot of girls that worked with me married Americans and some of them made very good matches, very good husbands and others not so good, like.  And because in the uniform they looked terrific but one, one girl and she married, Coffey I think they called him, and he was in tin cans and all that sort of thing, he was out travelling.  But she thought he was marvellous and here, but she had a very bad time when she went out, way in the back of beyond somewhere.  Another girl, Ann Nulty who married, she married an Italian and he was exceptionally good, she was very happy.  Another girl, she worked with us, she was nothing to do with us, but she went to visit them once and she said that Ann Nulty really had it good, that he was a marvellous husband and she felt sorry for Mary Prender, you know.  And Mary Prender was a nice wee girl; she said Mary Prender had a very hard time of it, very hard.
MM:	Were they very different to the men you were used to here?
F:	I’ll tell you, in those days, they used to come in and give us lovely sweets that they brought from America, candies as they called them, and they’d come in and they’d give you candies over the counter there and ask you for a date, you know.  And I remember there was a girl called Mary Spence, and she was awfully tiny, and she worked in the tea bar.  Well they used to come into the tea bar and have a cup of tea or a cup of coffee and so, she was a lovely looking girl but she was terribly, terribly small and they had a big board behind the counter for her.  And so, one day this fellow came in and said he’d meet her outside and whenever he saw the size of her he run!  She was that small, where he thought behind the counter she looked so tall!  He nearly died when he saw the size of her.  [Laughs]  Those were the kinds of things you laughed at the time, but they were quite nice, quite friendly.  They used to come in to pass the time, when they’d nothing to do they’d come in to pass the time.  And as I say, there were four girls that were behind the counter that went out with them.
MM:	Did you never go out with any of them?
F:	No, no.  

The interview ended at this point because Flora had a prior engagement.  She told me she had a very active social life in the Falls Road area.

Flora Interview: 30th November 1996

F1

