Frances, London. Interview: Friday, 5th December 2003

FS:	I was born in Dublin on the 1st August 1926 and I’ve lived in London, in England for sixty-one years [pause] sixty-two years, but in between I did go home for a short spell for six years but then I came back.
MM:	Why did you come to England first?
FS:	My mother decided I should have a job in London, I think.  I was the eldest of six children and the wages weren’t terribly high at the time.  She had a houseful of boarders as well.  She worked very hard and I think I was a bit cheeky, maybe, and she probably couldn’t handle me.  
MM:	How old were you?
FS:	I was fifteen on the 1st August and I came to England on the 1st September and I didn’t even have to have a passport, because I wasn’t sixteen.  My birth certificate was stamped at the emigration entry at Holyhead.
MM:	Had you any arrangements made for your arrival?
FS:	Yes. My mother had got a job for me.  She looked in the advertisements in the Catholic newspaper, the Universe and there was a lady living in Ireland who was interviewing people to work as domestics in a girls’ boarding school in Birmingham and she came and interviewed my mother and me and she agreed that I should go to this girls’ boarding school in Birmingham and I went on the 1st September.  I was to meet a cousin of my mother’s, who was to meet me at Birmingham but I hadn’t seen him for years and we missed each other.  I was stood there for the longest time and eventually came out.  It was wartime, there was a blackout and I asked people how to get to St. Bernard’s Road and I had to get a bus to Acocks Green in the dark, with my gas mask and the big case and a Ministry of Work label on my coat.  I eventually got to St. Bernard’s Road and I walked up this long, dark road and I came to a police station.  I went into the police station and asked them where the convent was.  There was a policeman behind the desk and there was another gentleman outside the desk.  I don’t know to this day if he was a policeman but he said oh I’m going that way, I’ll give her a lift.  I was delighted to get rid of the load of the case.  He was a decent man.  He took me up to the convent gate which was about five minutes away and he said don’t ring the bell until I’m gone and I did ring the bell.  This was half past ten at night and I’d left Dublin that morning at half six.  When the nun came and opened the door she said oh we thought you weren’t coming, we waited for you.  
There was this girls’ boarding school at St. Bernard’s Road and they were a French order, the Sisters of Our Lady of Compassion.  A lot of them were Irish and I was made very welcome, they were nice.  We worked very hard at the school, there were no dishwashers then and everything was done by hand but again, I was a bit cheeky and I used to fall out with the nuns.  I’d be changed, or the jobs would be changed, I’d be put down in the laundry to stand up on a stool with these big massive tubs with these big paddles to stir the clothes.  There were long corridors to scrub – no wonder I’ve arthritis in my knees.  Mass every morning and polish the church and one thing and another.  They had a Montessori school there and that had to be polished and when the girls went on holidays we used to clean all the paintwork and the curtains in the dormitories.  But the food was very good and there was no shortage because the nuns cooked all their own food.   And the gardener was the brother of the lady who came to interview me.  He was Mr. Byrne, that was his name, and he was deaf and dumb.  So we were quite safe there.  There were three of us girls who lived in the convent.  We were up in the attic.  There was no electricity and we had candles for light.
MM:	Were the other girls Irish too?
FS:	No, both Scottish.  One eventually entered as a postulant in the order – Annie from Glasgow.  The other girl didn’t.
MM:	Were they as young as you were?
FS:	Annie was older, she was about twenty-one but Jessie, she was about sixteen.  We got a half day a week on a Saturday, from three to six and this Saturday, Jessie and I went to the pictures down at Acocks Green and the picture was Nelson Eddy and Rita Stephens in ‘Chocolate Soldier’ and it was the last time I was let go to the pictures because one of the school teachers saw us, even though we were just at the pictures and walked home on our own, we were home about six.  And the nuns were very cross.  Now I’m older I can understand their worry, because there were a lot of soldiers and sailors around and foreign people, and we were under their care.  At the time we didn’t appreciate that but we weren’t allowed to go to the pictures anymore.
And the wages were ten shillings a week, from which my mother stipulated she wanted five shillings.  So once a month, Mother Juliana – she was an old French nun – we used to go up on a Sunday morning to get our wages and I used to get mine and we got a little lecture.  Once a month she’d give me the postal order and I’d have to write the letter to send the one pound postal order home to my mother.  We’d sit in and we’d go to bed about eight o’clock at night and we used to talk and there was one old nun who slept in the room next to us and she used to tell us to be quiet.  One time she reported me to the other nuns and I was sent as a punishment to sleep down in the dark air raid shelter on my own, for talking in the dormitory.  It’s a wonder I’m not afraid of the dark but I’m not afraid of the dark at all but [pause].
MM:	Did the schoolgirls and nuns have electric light?
FS:	They had electricity in the dormitories, yes.  In the convent – where we slept was in the attics.  Well, as I say the food was lovely and when it was the nun’s feast day – every day it was some nun’s feast day, except when it was Advent and Lent – they’d always have great feast days, nice cakes and things, which Sister Gerard used to make in the kitchen.  As I say, the food was grand.  But that’s where I learned to smoke, believe it or not, another girl came from Dublin – Margaret Nugent – and I waited up for her to let her in about half ten at night and the first thing is she pulled out a packet of Woodbine.  I said oh you can’t smoke here and she said I’m going to smoke and here have one.  And that’s where I had my first cigarette and I smoked then for fifty years [laughs].  I really enjoyed that cigarette.
MM:	Can I just ask you – when Margaret came was she sent by the Ministry of Labour or her parents?
FS:	I don’t know really what her situation was – I didn’t ask.  But the other two, Jessie and Annie, were there before me.  I think it was when Annie entered the convent as a postulant that they took on Margaret Nugent.  She came from Camden Street.  We used to have a good laugh but I don’t know where she went to afterwards.  One nun left while we there – a very pretty nun – and there were all kinds of bits of scandal, which I don’t know whether they were true or not, at the time.  But there was nun there, Mother John the Baptist – nuns who taught were called Mother and the others were called Sisters.  She was from Kerry, O’Connell was her name, Norah O’Connell and she was really sweet and we were great friends.  I have some holy pictures still.  They used to give you little holy pictures now and again.  And there was one little Scots nun, Mother Clare – she’d be standing in the yard sorting out the clothes – they’d have their names on all the clothes for the big laundry.  There was a big long red corridor to scrub every Saturday morning.  The nuns used to supervise them in the bathrooms and wait outside while they had baths.  There were curtains between the baths.  It was a big old-fashioned house, really, I think the school was just attached to it.  
MM:	Did you have anything to do with the schoolgirls?
FS:	No, you’d see them in passing really, you wouldn’t be talking to them.  But you went to Mass in the convent on Sunday morning at eight o’clock and then you went to the eleven o’clock – we were all marched, school children and all, up to the Friary, which was along the main road on the road to Sollihull.  And we went to Mass in the Priory, sorry, that was it.  The Franciscans.  And then on another occasion, we’d go out to maybe, to a place called [pause] another convent, a friend of one of the nuns, it would be her feast day and we’d all be taken there.  We’d all march there for a day out, kind of thing - that was the kind of thing that was done.  They were great occasions in our little lives, you know.
MM:	What about air raids?
FS:	Well, we didn’t have much noise or bombs but when we did, we’d all go down to the air raid shelter and you’d sort of just hear it in the distance, so I wasn’t really affected by it at that stage.
MM:	But you observed the blackout?
FS:	The blackout, yes, you had to carry a torch and when I came, I had no torch and I was struggling along.  I just think, compared to now, people weren’t molested or anything and you asked people the way and they were helpful, they would be helpful.
MM:	Did your mother not feel any anxiety about sending you off to a city at war?
FS:	She didn’t appear to, she thought she was doing the right thing.  I think she thought I would have entered the convent to become a nun – that was at the back of her mind.  She was very religious.  
MM:	Even for the times, ten shillings a week seemed very little in terms of wages, particularly for such hard work.
FS:	No, but my father now, who was a father of six children, his wages were only three pound ten shillings a week in Dublin, as a barman so that was [pause] in comparison, the five shillings seemed [pause].
MM:	Would you have ever thought of holding on to your money yourself?
FS:	No, and the reason that I went so meek and mildly was that you did what you were told by parents in those days and in a way, because my mother and I, we didn’t really get on, because as I say, I was a bit cheeky growing up, mouthy, and in a way I was glad to get away from her.  And then when I used to come home on holiday, I came home on holiday the first time and I was just inside the door when I got a slap on the side of my face from her.  How dare you misbehave in front of the nun and have her write to complain to me?  I made a show of her.  And she didn’t even know them, really, this kind of thing.  I also was wearing a pair of trousers, slacks, and my father said get those trousers off.  He said only low, bad women wore trousers [laughs] but it was from an economical point of view because we’d clothing rationing and clothing coupons and sweet coupons and that.  We didn’t have our ration books because the convent kept them because they gave us the food but you had your own sweet coupons.  I can’t remember how much sweets we got a month, it might have been half a pound, something like that.  Then there were the clothing coupons, one coupon for a pair of lisle stockings.
MM:	How long did you stay there?
FS:	I was there for just over a year and they, I think they got fed up with me because I was cheeky.  They got me another job at Grantham, with a Catholic family who were the Honourable Mrs. Holland, who was a relation of Lord Revelstoke, who lived, who owned Lambay Island.  Strangely enough, with all the events that happened over the last few years, he also brought down Barings Bank, he was related to Barings Bank.  He brought them down, the same as Nick Leeson did, a coincidence.  But they were a very nice family.  They had five children.
MM:	What was your job there?
FS:	I was house parlour maid there and the cook was Irish.  They were evacuated from London - they were quite posh people, they had butlers and cooks and maids and all in London.  They lived in Onslow Square in London and they were evacuated to Grantham during the war.  They were a Catholic family.  Mrs. Holland, she was a Daphne Baring and she was a convert and Mr. Holland – he was in the Air Force, he was an Air Force officer.  And his son, Patrick was an architect, who also went to Dublin and lived and had a studio in Dublin for years.  The eldest son was Francis, he went to Downside School and Patrick went to Ampleforth.  The two girls Lucy and Cecilia, went to I think it was St. Mary’s in Ascot and then she had another baby, Rosemary.  The nurse came and lived in for a couple of months, I think and then the nanny came and lived in.  Quite a big household they had.
MM:	And would they have Irish staff because the English staff had been called up for war work?
FS:	Well, they brought their staff with them from London, except me.  They brought the cook up and the head housemaid used to come and visit and they’d have a butler come and visit.
MM:	Were they not subject to conscription?
FS:	No, the cook wasn’t, Sheila wasn’t – she was with them.  The others [pause] the head housemaid, she was older, she was in her fifties but I suppose the butlers had gone to war then.  Every so often they would go down to London on a shopping spree and have the car in the garage [pause] the food there was very good.  I think I got one pound a week then.
MM:	Did you get to keep any of that?
FS:	I think I kept [pause] I can’t remember.  I’m sure I still sent some home.  But they were a very nice family and they had the room there to wash the silver and the glass and all that and there was a woman who came in and did all the saucepans and the rough work.  I remember asking the cook how old she was and she said you don’t ask ladies their age – she was fifty-one at the time [laughs].  Sheila – she was from Killarney and her brother came over, he was paid to work in England and she asked Mrs. Holland could he stay and there was a spare bedroom at the top of the house.  Connie, that was his name, he was allowed to stay there.  They were a really lovely family.
MM:	Were your living conditions better than the convent?
FS:	Ah they were, very good.  You had your own room, and all the rest of it.  On the top floor there were four bedrooms.  I had the first one, Sheila had the next one, Frances Holland had the next one and Con, the boy Connie, he had the other one.  And they had a sewing room in it and a back stairs down to the kitchen.  It was a lovely big house, really lovely.  But they were very nice people and the food was good.  I was treated well.  And then I took it into my head when I was seventeen and a half that I wanted to go nursing and I applied to Grantham Hospital, which was on the Great North Road, opposite Mrs. Thatcher’s shop.  I used to see Margaret Thatcher when she was a young girl, the same age as myself, standing at the door with her two blond plaits.  There was a Dr. Martin in the hospital at Grantham and he was from Dublin.  They were coal people, coal merchants, and he used to take me to Mass in his car.  He was very nice.  I stayed there for [pause] it must have been nearly a year.  We had soldiers in and one day I was on second lunch but [pause].
MM:	Was this as a student nurse?
FS:	Yes, as a student – trainee nurse.  At that time, because the war was on, they allowed you to enter at seventeen and a half without a good education, not like now.  They took people – it was either that or go to war work, kind of thing.  I would like to have joined the Air Force but I knew my mother wouldn’t let me do that.
MM:	And how did she take it when she heard you’d gone for nursing?
FS:	She was delighted with it, she had great plans.  She thought I would come home and she would buy a big house in Berkeley Road.  I would be the midwife and she would be the housekeeper and we’d have these women having babies [laughs].  I was a great disappointment to her.  I stayed there then [pause] this day, I was in the ward and my suspender broke.  We had suspenders then and my stockings fell down and one of the soldiers chased me round the beds and my hat, my veil came off and who came back into the ward only the sister.  And there was uproar.  I was taken to the Matron’s office and tore off a strip and moved to the women’s ward [laughs].  The disgrace – I’ll never live it down, I said to myself.  I stayed there – I think they must have sacked me because I wouldn’t have left otherwise.  I can’t remember.  And I went to Boston.  I got a job in Boston General Hospital and I loved it there.  And I took my first exams up there.  That was up in Lincolnshire.  Grantham was up in Lincolnshire as well but Boston was a bit further east, near the Wash, where the planes used to come down in the water.  We used to have the Air Force in and the soldiers in there.
MM:	So you actually had casualties?
FS:	The casualties would come in, yes indeed.  That was a lovely cottage hospital.  I failed the theory part of my exams – I was all right in the practical but I wasn’t very good at remembering the theory.  I didn’t study enough, to be honest, I wasn’t cut out for studying.  I’m more a practical person.  I think I’m the dumbest in the family but I’ve survived.  And from there then, I left there then, and I went to the fever hospital and I was working there at the height of the polio epidemic from 1945 to 1946.  I was in Boston General Hospital when the war ended in 1945 and at that time, you were locked in at night.  Ten o’clock, you had to be in the home except if you’d got a pass till eleven, once a week or twelve, once a month, if you were going to a dance.
MM:	Was this a standard thing?  It was nothing to do with the war?
FS:	No, it was a standard thing.  And the night sister came over from the hospital and locked the main door of the home.  If there was a fire you couldn’t get out.  And so the night the war was over, we were all locked in as usual and we heard the soldiers – there was a camp at the back and we heard the soldiers all coming back shouting the war is over, the war is over, so we all came down, over the railings and down the town at two o’clock in the morning.  There was a huge big bonfire going, it was the best night of my life.  And there was a terrific atmosphere, back over the rails, back into the home for the morning. [Both laugh.]  And at that time, we used to go to parties at the American camps.  You were taken – a notice would go up that the American Air Force would invite six nurses to a party, from each of the hospitals, and if you were off you could go.  You’d put your name down.  I went to one – I managed to get to one of them.  The stuff was beautiful – they had Christmas cakes, fruit, everything was really nice and we came back and I couldn’t wait to get to the bathroom.  I nearly made a show of myself at the front door of the home and the night sister said Nurse Flynn, couldn’t you control yourself.  I just said I’m very sorry sister but I was never so embarrassed in all my life.  Then I went to the fever hospital at the height of the polio epidemic and they were so short of staff only one block of wards was open, only one ward with all – there were all cubicles.  Babies with polio and that and even though I was only going into second year nursing, I was giving injections to polio babies and all this kind.  You were nursing them all night and you were on your own.
MM:	Was it mainly children?
FS:	They were mostly children, and adults as well, and at ten o’clock the night [pause] he was the handyman used to come in.  They were on duty by turn and he’d bring in fuel for the night, which was kind of wet coal or wet turf because you had stoves to keep going.  You’d to keep the motor going all night and you were there all night on your own.  You were locked in – he’d lock the door and take the key over to an office and you were locked in until the morning.  But they were so short of staff you could only – there was only one nurse could do it at a time.  They were very short of staff there.  Then I left that eventually and I went [pause] some friends I had, I’m still friendly with this couple now, I met the lady when she was having her first child, who has sadly since died when she was fifty-six.  They’re sixty-three years married now.  I went up to see them last year and they’re a lovely couple.  But I went to work in a printing factory, on a flat machine.  
I met a chap and I got engaged to him but he wasn’t very [pause] I took him to my friends one night, this couple – to their house and we had a lovely meal.  But what did he do, at the end of the meal he took the plate up and he licked it.  [Both laugh.]  And I said to myself no way can I take you home to mother and that was the end of the romance [laughs].  I broke it off after that, I thought I can’t handle this.
MM:	And had you told your mother about him?
FS:	No, and the excuse I used was that he wasn’t a Catholic and that’s why I broke it off.  
MM:	Were you still sending money home all this time?
FS:	I always sent money home, yes, but Ma would never recognise it.  In later years, she always said I’ll look after those who looked after me.  And then I came home to have an operation in 1947 before the National Health started.  I was going to have to have a hernia done and my father said come home, don’t have it done there, you can be looked after here.  And I had it done in St. Vincent’s in 1948 and I stayed then and I went to work in St. Kevin’s Hospital in Dublin, as an auxiliary and that’s where I met my future husband.  I was working with his sister on the ward and he was working there as well and we used to socialise.  That’s where we met.
MM:	Just going back a bit to the war years, when you were coming was it difficult to travel?
FS:	No, but I forgot to put in that the fact that I was from Ireland, I had to go and register with the police.  I think it was every six weeks, with my identity card, and if you moved out of the area you had to go and tell them.  I forgot that part.  And of course, you carried the gas mask everywhere with you.
MM:	Had you registered with the British authorities in Dublin before you left?
FS:	No, not really, no.  
MM:	Your mother got the job and she made the arrangements?
FS:	She got and job and I think she must have taken me over to the British embassy, I think it was in Merrion Square, she took me over there but there was no passport.  I have my birth certificate somewhere and on the back it has an oval stamp, 1 September 1941 and that was the entry thing to cover me.  I was fifteen and I had five shillings that my father gave me to buy a cup of tea.  And later, in later years, he sadly told, after my mother had died, he told me that morning he had broken up the gas meter to give me the five shillings.  I thought it was so sad.  
MM:	So she had let you go off with nothing?
FS:	No, she gave me nothing.  My Da gave me five shillings – he was so good.  I never really got on with my mother, but I loved my father to bits.  He was a lovely man and funny, when I married my husband, he had the same birthday as my father, which pleased me very much because he was the same kind of man.  
MM:	Going over, I know you didn’t chose to go but did you ever have the sense that this is where I’m going to be spending my life?
FS:	Not really, I just wandered on, meandered on with life, kind of thing.  I never [pause] it never entered my head that I’d go back to live in Ireland somehow and [pause].
MM:	Do you think you might have associated your mother’s cruelty with being in Ireland?
FS:	I don’t know, to be honest, but it never interested me.  I used to come home on holidays to see them, to see the family and that, but I never wanted to stay.  The atmosphere in England is completely different to Ireland, although you don’t go mad it’s just a different kind of life, really.
MM:	During the war years you seemed to be mainly mixing with Irish people?
FS:	Yes, I didn’t meet many English people.  I would like to have joined the Air Force but I knew my mother wouldn’t let me and I also [pause] I really could have got away with doing it when I got to the age of eighteen and on my own but I didn’t think of it then, it was past, the time had passed on when I started the nursing.  And I loved nursing. 
MM:	Did you discuss it with her when you were on holiday, that you would like to go into nursing?
FS:	No, never.  I did that myself.
MM:	How did you go about telling her?
FS:	I probably wrote a letter but she was very pleased because she had great hopes [laughs] which I sadly ruined.
MM:	It fascinates me that the nuns would write to her to complain about you.
FS:	They wrote in a letter, they wrote and told her I was cheeky.  I think that was why she sent me in the first place, because I was cheeky.  You see, Mother Juliana never came out, she was bedridden, but reports went up to her.  They were nice but the punishment – each night, one nun had to take duty and walk me down to [pause] in my nightclothes.  Walk me down to the top of the cellar steps, switch the light on, I went down and got into the first bed, which were camp beds, she turned the light off, shut the door and went away.  I don’t know why I’m not frightened of the dark, I was just left there until the morning.
MM:	Were you locked in?
FS:	I don’t know, I can’t remember.  I don’t suppose I was but I don’t know.  I don’t know, I never came upstairs in the dark, I just went to sleep.
MM:	And had you been to a convent school in Dublin?
FS:	Oh yes, I know what nuns were like.  Yes, I did, Kings Inn Street.  I used to get slapped there for being late because my mother had a shop and I had to stay and get all the kids out to school, wash up, prepare the vegetables and the meat and whatever for my father’s dinner before I went to school.  I never got to school before half past nine.  It was just being the eldest, you did those kind of things, you didn’t query it, you know.
MM:	In recent research about Irish women emigrating to England it shows there was a lot of discussion about the dangers for young Irish women living in England.  Were you given any warnings about that?
FS:	I wasn’t even told the facts of life.
MM:	So you had no idea what dangers there were?
FS:	I didn’t know.  I was lucky I was enclosed in a convent, I wouldn’t have known what had hit me.  If that man hadn’t been so good, my father always said to put my two hands together and thank God that man was a decent man.  But if he hadn’t been, I wouldn’t have known the difference because I didn’t know anything.  But I think it was an absolute crime that I wasn’t told.
MM:	And when they were punishing you for going to the pictures, did they say why?
FS:	Yes, we were told off, we were hauled over [pause].
MM:	Did they ever explain why they thought you shouldn’t have gone?
FS:	No, they just said that there were a lot of soldiers and foreigners about, so yes, they did explain.  But it was only when I got older and had children of my own that I realised they were right.
MM:	And had you been told in advance that you weren’t supposed to go?
FS:	No, we hadn’t because it was the first time we went.  
MM:	Well, it seems a bit harsh punishing you for doing something you hadn’t been told not to do.
FS:	Well, they were worried.  I excuse them because I feel they were worried.  I feel they had a moral responsibility for us.
MM:	But if they hadn’t told you that you couldn’t do it?
FS:	Well, we didn’t see any danger, you see.  They wouldn’t talk about things like that, all they did was pray, and eat and sleep.
MM:	It just seems very [pause] they said they were protecting you by punishing you because you broke the rules but they never told you what the rules were.
FS:	No, I don’t remember being told about the rules and we just wandered down, went for a walk in the afternoon and came to the cinema, like you would and saw the film was on and went in.  Nelson Eddy was the star of the moment.
MM:	What were you allowed to do for entertainment?
FS:	Well, there was nothing.  You knitted or sewed and there was no radio, no television, nothing.  You didn’t read or anything, just talked to each other.  You could read the ‘Universe’ [both laugh] and just talk to each other.  Things like that.  Then we went to bed at eight and we were up at half past six in the morning.
MM:	Were you working all day?
FS:	Well you would [pause] in between there’d be a little break, maybe after meals and that and in the evening, then, when the school would close I’d have to go and sweep the corridors and sweep out the bathrooms and do things like that.  
MM:	Do you remember ever feeling envious of the schoolgirls because their lives would have been so much easier than yours?
FS:	No, not at all.  I’ve never been jealous of anyone in my life.  I’ve never been jealous of anybody or envious – I might say, oh that’s lovely, I’d love to have that – but not seriously jealous.  
MM:	It really was a very tough life and for such poor pay.
FS:	Well, I think it was criminal, actually, you’d be put in jail for it now.  But I said to my Da later, why didn’t you stop Ma when she was sending me away and he said your mother was the boss.  It was a poor excuse really, he was too quiet.  
MM:	As you were growing older how did you find out about the facts of life, so to speak?
FS:	From other girls, that’s how I did.
MM:	Did your mother never speak to you when you came home on holiday?
FS:	Never mentioned it, I don’t think she ever told us about your monthlies, it just happened.  We were in Holybank Road, I went from Holybank Road and we were in a room at the back, three of us girls in one bed and three boys in the other, because she had boarders in the house.  I got up this morning and my pyjama bottoms [pause] I was hoping my brother Paul hadn’t seen me because he was over there in the room, getting up.  We were all in together like that but there was nothing wicked about it, you didn’t take any notice of boys and girls, nothing was mentioned.  So I think if things are not talked about, maybe they don’t put ideas in young people’s heads.  We didn’t know anything, whereas kids now experiment with each other and one thing and another.  It never entered our heads that there might be anything evil going on, that we knew of.
MM:	Well, I wouldn’t call it evil but there certainly seems to have been a preoccupation in the Irish press at the time with the so-called ‘evils’ of sex.  When you were in the hospital, when your suspenders let you down, clearly they put a wrong interpretation on what was going on.
FS:	They did, yes, they didn’t like it.  
MM:	Would they have been nuns or a religious management?
FS:	No, it was a public hospital, NHS.  They were martinets.  They used to sit in the dining room, the Matron sat at the table and you couldn’t eat breakfast until she said morning prayers.  Then the toast was passed all the way down the table.  You might get a bit, if you were lucky in the end, you’d have to send down for more bread or something.
MM:	It was very hierarchical?
FS:	Yes, and you wouldn’t speak to a senior nurse unless you were spoken to, or a sister.  Very strict.  And you each had your own container for your butter, with your name on it and half the time you’d come to get your butter and someone else would have eaten it.  It was rationed, you know.  Oh, it was a great hierarchy in the hospital, yes, very much so.  And then when they came on the wards, the sister stood on the ward and the first thing she did was said morning prayers.  She went around each patient and asked them how they were and in the evening, when she had finished her shift, she said evening prayers.  And that was the norm.  
But Christmas was lovely in the hospital.  We sang carols the night before, walked all through with the candles and the red capes, with the candles, that was really nice, through the wards.  And then on Christmas Day the surgeons came in and carved turkeys in each ward.  They’d have a big turkey on a trolley.  It was really beautiful.  And then you had a staff dinner and then they had duck.  Really nice, party atmosphere.  And then when you went on night duty you had to move out of the day home completely and move into the night home.  And you had to go to bed because the night sister slept on the ground floor and she’d hear you going in and out.  If you were out in the day and that night you had [pause] you had to have dinner before you went on, we had breakfast before we went on duty.  And she’d say, if you were out, Nurse Flynn, what were you doing out at half past twelve today, you should have been in bed.  Very strict.  And in the morning we came off and we had a hot dinner.  Imagine eating hot beetroot with white sauce first thing in the morning.
MM:	I can’t imagine eating it at any time of the day.
FS:	A full dinner before you went to bed.  And you were in that – you did three months of that each time.  It was a nuisance having to move everything out of your room and move back again.  I worked in theatre.  I did three months in theatre and on a Sunday, you did all the sterilising of all the drums, you had to pack all the drums with the trays, then autoclave them, which was the sterilisation.  When they came out, they had to be all brassoed, silvoed and polished.  That was the student nurses’ job in the theatre on a Sunday afternoon and the staff nurse would be checking the instruments and doing that kind of thing.  On the wards the nursing staff, two of the nursing staff would be doing the lockers, while the visitors were there, clearing out all the rubbish and that kind of thing.  Cleaning the sluices, washing the bed pans, doing beds.  When anyone left a bed it was completely washed in carbolic solution and there wasn’t half the infection there is now.  I think it’s very careless now.
MM:	So did you have to study then on top of all this work?
FS:	I was just going to come to that.  That was terrible because I wasn’t one for studying and we did [pause] we had a horrible sister tutor who didn’t like me, because I was cheeky again.  I remember twice I had to write out ‘I will not be rude again to Sister Tutor’ one hundred times.
MM:	And what age were you when you had to do this?
FS:	I was eighteen [both laugh].  She was a little woman like Queen Victoria, and she had the white cap on tied under her chin and she made me write ‘I will not be rude to Sister Tutor’ one hundred times [laughs].  No wonder I couldn’t study, but I loved the practical, and I’ve always been involved in nursing all my life.  I ended up as a Care Assistant.  We went to Nottingham for our first exam and we were overbooked into the YMCA hostel in Nottingham and they had to find us another place.  We were in an awful old place and we were in Nottingham City Hospital but I failed the theory part of my exam.  But I carried on then and if you wanted to register then you could automatically register as an S.E.N. if you had taken the exam but our wages were only six pounds ten shillings a month and it was three guineas to register, so you never registered.  But I always got by being an auxiliary and that, but it’s the piece of paper that counts that says you’re qualified, no matter how much knowledge you’ve learned, that doesn’t count.  But I was a good practice nurse in my own way.
MM:	One of the other women who have spoken to me was a student nurse in Sellyoak Hospital.  She qualified there but she got paid three pounds a week when she first went and she said that was more than the salaries of some of the qualified nurses.  She referred to the Rushcliffe deal; does that mean anything to you?
FS:	No, I never heard of it.  I have a letter out there, from that 1947 thing when we had [pause] the snow was up to there and it was a really bad winter, a letter from the local Council, sending me five pounds as a thank you for working during that period when it was so hard.  That was in Boston, because the fever hospital was in Boston as well.  I remember on one ward the sister saying to me, nurse, will you wash that bed with carbolic, one in twenty and I thought what’s one in twenty? I went to the staff nurse and I said to her she wants me to wash that bed in one in twenty.  She said she’s waiting for you to go and ask her how to make it, so go on, ask her.  I said sister, I don’t know how to make that so she said she’d show me and it was one portion of carbolic to nineteen of water and I never forgot that.  But if I had made a fool of myself and tried to make it up not knowing – but I wouldn’t.  You always had to ask someone but this was what the nurse told me, she’s waiting for you, it was a test really.  I thoroughly enjoyed it.  I only wish I was more academic and I could have got the qualification.
MM:	Was there no chance of doing the exam again?
FS:	You’d have to ask but I didn’t want to because I was nervous.  I knew I couldn’t study, I wasn’t able to study.  My mother used to say that.
MM:	What about when you were in school in Dublin, how did you get on then?
FS:	My mother would say, Frances, go out and do those dishes, peel those potatoes for tomorrow.  Clare, my next sister, go and do your studies.  But it didn’t bother me at the time, although I think it must have rankled at the back of my mind, that I was stupid.  When we moved to Holybank Road she went over to Iona Road school to get us in there and Sister Magdalen said I can put Clare into third class but there was no vacancy for me in fourth and Sister Magdalen wanted to put me into fifth.  And Ma said no, I wouldn’t be able for it.  And then she went all around to look for a school for me and I ended up in Scoil Mhuire in Marlborough Street, where it was all Irish.   And then she went, I’d forgotten this until Clare reminded me of it, that she used to pay for me then to go and have English lessons in Stephens Green, of an evening.  I remember going over to that college, Hume Street, I think it was, to learn English, in case I wouldn’t be able to speak English from going to the all-Irish school.  Ten shillings or something the lessons were.
MM:	And all because she was convinced you weren’t academically minded?  And did she ever sit down and go over your homework with you?
FS:	She made sure we had done our homework, you had to do it, but she was the same with Paul.  She’d tell Paul [pause] he wasn’t bright in her mind and that’s why she took them to England because she said they’d only end up as messenger boys in Dublin.  She was very ambitious.  She should never have got married and had children; she was a business woman all her life.  And funny, she comes from the Huguenots, the De Sales, and their tradition is they’re business people and she had this shop twice.  She had it before I was born and then they gave it up and then they had it again.  She went back again in 1939 or 1940 and she had it for a while when the war had started and she couldn’t get the quotas of the food because she hadn’t been a trader long enough and she had to let it go.  That’s when I was looking after the kids and going down to school late, because she was down at the shop at half six in the morning.
MM:	When you were at school, was there was ever a suggestion that you should think about where you would go afterwards?
FS:	No, not at all, there was nothing like that.  She even came down to the school and said I wasn’t to be allowed to sit with Angela Scott, that she was a bad influence on me, my best friend.  Something wrong with Angela Scott – she used to pinch money from her sister’s handbag, ten shillings at a time.  The sister worked in - there used to be a shop called Lambs in Talbot Street, do you remember it?  Nearly opposite Lenihans, Lambs was, it was a haberdashery shop and Nance got work there and Angela Scott used to be pinching ten bob at a time out of Nance’s bag.  I must have told Ma about this and she went to the school about it.
You weren’t allowed to speak English in the school playground; you were supposed to speak Gaelic all the time.  But we were in a few plays, we were in a play in the Abbey, the Faerie Queen, I remember that.  It was all in Irish, a school thing it must have been – I think it was a festival with two or three days at a time.  I was the Faerie Queen because I was the tallest in the class.  I used to sit with my shoulders hunched.  
MM:	Did you look older than your age?
FS:	I don’t know, but I was tall and I stuck out like a sore thumb.  I don’t think I did.
MM:	Did you ever get an opportunity to talk about being sent away, to consider whether there might be something else you could do?
FS:	No, you were just sent.  Getting the train and gone.  I feel proud of myself that I survived all these little trials and came out on top and still be able to laugh.  That’s the main thing.  
MM:	You weren’t an emigrant in one sense, in that it wasn’t your choice to do it, but even though many people were forced to go because of personal or economic circumstances, at least they did arrange it for themselves.
FS:	I was delighted, I think, at the time.  
MM:	Was there a sense when you got there that you decided this would be where you’d spend the rest of your life?
FS:	No, not really, no.  Now I enjoyed every minute of it, I never was homesick for one day and I can honestly say that.  People think I’m mad when I say that but I was never homesick for one day.  I think it’s because I didn’t get on with Ma.  I missed my father, I loved Da.
MM:	Did he ever come to visit you?
FS:	Even when Aidan died, she wouldn’t let him come over.  She said she’ll only fight with you, did you ever hear such rubbish in all your life?  We often had rows, her and I, through letters.
MM:	What about during the war?  When you were coming home and you needed travel permits – did you have to arrange that yourself?
FS:	I’d have to do that but I don’t remember about the travel permits.  I don’t remember getting the ticket either, whether they must have done it for me, the nuns, I don’t remember ever having to get a ticket.  I just got the train in Luce Street to Crewe, changed at Crewe and got on the boat.  I don’t remember that really.
MM:	When you got back to Dublin, would you have thought that maybe you were better off in England, being reasonably well fed even with the hard work?
FS:	Not really, no, I didn’t connect it at all.  Just do what you’re told and get on with it and don’t think about it, I think that was the way.  That was the way I looked at things, anyway.  It must have been the easiest way out, maybe.
MM:	I know you were mainly mixing with Irish people but did you encounter any anti-Irish feeling because Southern Ireland was neutral in the war?
FS:	No, I didn’t.  I met a bit of anti-Irish feeling in the sixties but I didn’t meet it till then.  Where I lived in Camberwell, this horrible woman said to me one day why don’t you go back to where you come from and it was the worst thing I’d ever heard.  I was very annoyed but as I say, other than that, I never used to meet many Irish people really until the latter years, when I got married and started moving into the community, going to the church with the school, mainly through the school, meeting other parents when I’d go to collect the children from the school.  My husband was from Dublin as well and his family.  His sisters were over here and we mixed with them, really.  
MM:	What about the Scots woman you met in the convent?
FS:	Jessie, I don’t know where she went.  She came out of, I don’t know whether she was illegitimate or an orphan or whatever, but she was reared by the Good Shepherd nuns in Scotland.  She spoke very highly of them.  She’d roaring red hair.  
MM:	Was she paid the same as you?
FS:	We were all paid the same; that was the going rate at the time.  And you had to pay sixpence insurance when you were sixteen, it was sixpence.  Then it changed when the national health came in.
I remember a little baby, when I was in the hospital, and this little baby was dying and I kind of secretly baptised it myself.  It wasn’t a Catholic, it wasn’t anything, but it was very tiny and it had kind of [pause] it had an operation to correct the stomach [pause] pylorrhic stenosis, it was called and the little baby had died.  Before it died I got some water and just made the sign of the cross over it and called it a name.  I was sort of proud of myself for doing that, because that was the way we were brought up, in the religion.
MM:	What about the parents?
FS:	I didn’t ask them, it was in the middle of the night.  I didn’t ask them.  In that day, there was no political correctness in those days.  You just kind of did what you should do, kind of thing.  You learned it in school that the religion was there and you knew the baby hadn’t been christened so you just did it.  Which was wrong probably? [Both laugh.] I’ll go to hell.  But that’s the way we were.  I never told anybody, I just did it myself.
MM:	What about the patients?  Would you have soldiers coming back as casualties?
FS:	Oh yes, they would, they’d have come from other hospitals because if they lived locally they’d come to us.  I used to [pause] I went out to the pictures with one, he was married, a nice man, and I was told off about that.  Someone saw me, the sister tutor saw me, she was Irish as well, she saw me and I was hauled over the coals for that, Matron called me, because he was married.  And we only went to the pictures, never even gave me a kiss, gave me some of his chocolate ration.  Ever such a nice man, he was, but that was wrong, you couldn’t do that.  It was very moralistic, in some ways.  But you were told off and you accepted it and that was the end of it.  I felt a bit of a fool.
MM:	Were there ever any bombing victims?
FS:	Not round there, not when I was there, no.  It was coming near to the end of the war then.
MM:	Did you get to see much of the area around the hospital?
FS:	I didn’t see much of the countryside, no, not really.  One patient invited me for a holiday, they worked – I think they managed a farm.  I don’t know whether they were tenant farmers in Crowland, which was in Norfolk.  Ruby, I can just see the woman, I can’t remember what her other name was.  But she invited me down for a holiday and you got a month’s holiday and that time I didn’t go home.  I think I probably had no money or I hadn’t enough money and I went down there and I picked potatoes and everything and carrots and things and the wages I would have got kept me.  I hitch-hiked on a big lorry and I never told anyone that.  And the case – I was fine – the driver was probably a decent family man because I’m sure girls got raped and everything then, just the same but you didn’t hear about it.  But I lugged this big case up on to the lorry and I never even told my kids that [laughs].  Talk about being the daring one.  I must tell you this – this will give you a laugh.  We used to go to Mass in the church in Boston.  It was a community thing, with a welcome for soldiers and all this, and then we used to go to the dances.  I had a friend who used to go to the dances and this chap who used to the church saw us at the dances and he’d been a patient.  He was from Jamaica or somewhere like that, an air force man, and I was dancing with him round and that was it and he said he was going to Ireland.  So me, my Christian attitude then, said oh you’ll have to go and see my mother and she’ll make you a cup of tea.  Apparently, he turned up at the door and Ma nearly had a heart attack but she invited him in for a cup of tea and everyone was pulling the curtains back to have a look at him.  I’m sure they thought I was going out with him, but I was never going out with him.
MM:	I take it was just because he was black that it caused consternation?
FS:	They’d never seen a black man before, unless the odd one in Trinity, but my mother wouldn’t have noticed them even, she’d scoot into Henry Street and scoot home again.  
MM:	Did she get on to you about it?
FS:	No, but when I got home I got how dare you send that man, who is he?  I said well we were told to be good Christians at the church and I was doing my duty.  That was all.  
The fellow I was engaged to bought me a bike, it was a lovely bike, I think it cost twenty-six pounds and an engagement ring.  But we only had a kiss and a cuddle, there was no sex or anything in those days – nowhere to go, anyway.  And his sister had a lovely shop and I used to go down there to meet him and when I’d be coming away, she’d always give me twenty pears.  She was really nice.  This was the fellow that licked the plate, he was a bus driver.  So when I gave him back the ring, I kept the bike, but I gave him back the ring.  I put it in a cigarette box and left it in a café in an envelope, that the busmen used to use and I sold the bike for a tenner.  Talk about being mercenary!
MM:	Would the bike not have been more use to you than the tenner?
FS:	It would have been but I think I was coming home and I just sold the bike.  That was right.
MM:	Did you ever hear from him again?
FS:	No, but my friend used to tell me [pause] he got married afterwards, he was older than me, he’s dead now.  Phil knew him in Boston.  No one knows all my secrets only you [laughs].  I’d an uneventful life really but I enjoyed it.  
MM:	I wouldn’t say uneventful by any means [laughs]. Not entirely conventional either.  
FS:	Sure my mother was the same.  She never went back to Ireland – at eighteen, she went to first work on munitions and she didn’t like all the women around her effing and blinding and swearing.  But she never went back for years.
Frances, 5th December 2003




FS1


