Kathleen, Portstewart.  Interview: 29th November 2003

KT:	Well, I’m Kathleen T.  I was Kathleen F. and I was born in Belfast.  My sister and I were working in Portstewart and I met my husband when he was over here training.  He was in the army. 
MM:	In the British army?
KT:	Yes, definitely.  Then it went on from here, you know, we got married and then we couldn’t have a honeymoon.  We only had a weekend because he had to go back to barracks.  Then, this was during the month of January; it was towards the end, when we were able to get a pass.  You had to get a pass to go to England, to go to his mother, because I hadn’t met his family.  He had met my mother and his mother had corresponded with my mother.  She wasn’t all that pleased that I was marrying an Englishman but she soon changed her tune when she met him and then, of course, I went to England.
MM:	What year was this?
KT:	That was 1941 when I was married.  My husband was being posted back to England, you see, to train for going to Europe after D-Day and he wanted me to move over.  I went to live with his mother and his family.  There was only his sister at home, because his brothers were also in the army.  We moved over then and I was very happy there.  They were really lovely people.  That was in Cookham, Berkshire, a very nice part of the country.  Well, of course, he had to go back to the barracks to get on with the training, so I lived there with them.  My father-in-law, he was in the police, he was the police sergeant and the village policeman.  Then, of course, I had to register for work.
MM:	Northern Irish women weren’t subject to conscription.  Did you have to register because you were married to an Englishman?  
KT:	Yes, because I was married, you see, so I had to register.  I would have had to work in any case – I would have wanted to work. I would have wanted to be idle.  It’s different if you have your own home.  My father-in-law knew somebody who had this [pause] actually it was attached to a very, sort of high-class jewellers.  Queen Mary used to come down and shop there, the old Queen Mary.  So they set up a small light industry.  It was doing meters for aircraft.  Well, he was in touch with somebody and managed to get me in there otherwise I was going to have to go on the buses.  They were crying out for people and I didn’t fancy that.  
MM:	Did you have to go through a local labour exchange?
KT:	Well, I would have done other than my father-in-law getting me in there first.
MM:	Do you remember the name of the company?
KT:	Yes, Biggs, Biggs the Jewellers.  They were very nice there.  What they did [pause] they did it to keep their staff, more or less, because they had very skilled people.  It was mainly I think to keep the staff, the men, so that the men who were older didn’t have to go to war.  But it was very interesting and we were well treated.  You had to do fire watch and you’d stay on if it was your turn, it was on a rota basis.  There was a small canteen attached to it, and she was very good.  She used to lay on our supper for us, you know, and that sort of thing.
MM:	What about the actual work you had to do?  What were your duties?
KT:	Well, I was doing the setting of the meters.  You know, they were passed through the [pause], they were made up and then they were passed to me for inspection.  Balancing and that [pause]
MM:	So it was quite a responsible job?
KT:	It was a responsible job, yes, it was.  That was in Maidenhead, you see, and I travelled backwards and forwards by bus.  My sister-in-law, she was in the office of a fashion shop, and she transferred to Boots, the chemist, and she was a secretary in Boots, the chemist.  We used to travel together.
MM:	How long did that take every day?
KT:	Only twenty minutes, it wasn’t too far.
MM:	What sort of hours were you working?
KT:	We started at [pause] I think it was nine and we finished at five.
MM:	And did you get a break for lunch?
KT:	Oh yes, we had the canteen there.  It was quite a small canteen, just for the people working there.
MM:	What sort of people were you working with?  Were there other women?
KT:	Yes, quite a few were women.  There were some men – the men were on the assembly line.  They were really watchmakers for the jewellers in the first place.  
MM:	They were skilled workers?
KT:	Very skilled, yes.  They tried to keep their staff.  There were two Miss Biggs, their father had died.
MM:	What kind of training did you get?
KT:	Well, I watched someone else and then I got to know it.  Of course, I was on the last stage of it.  If they weren’t right, I had to pass them back because you could never send out a piece that wasn’t right.  
MM:	Were you balancing them with a machine?
KT:	No, by hand.  I just had some tools.
MM:	And then they went into the aircraft?
KT:	Yes.  Where we lived near Maidenhead, there was a small airfield close to us.  I think it was called Ferries, the Ferries Field, something like that.  They used to fly planes from there and it had been a base for aircraft for a long time.  Amy Johnson flew from there – you’ve probably heard of her?
MM:	Yes.  Did you ever have the opportunity to see the aircraft in action – to see the end product of your work?
KT:	No, I never had that opportunity.  No, it was very much in wartime so there were no jaunts or that sort of thing.  You made your own pleasure really, we used to go for bike rides and walks and simple things.  I was speaking to my sister-in-law last night to see if she could remember much about those times.  She said well we couldn’t really go anywhere; we couldn’t go down to the coast or anything, because it was all blocked off.  You couldn’t go down and take a trip to the coast because it was all sealed off.
MM:	It’s something you forget about, that side of things, especially the security.
KT:	Yes.  My husband went over to France; it was D-Day plus five that he went.  
MM:	That must have been a very stressful time for you?
KT:	Well, it was, yes.  We corresponded and I seemed to get most of the letters but of course they were censored, they knew very well they couldn’t put anything in them to start with that would say where they were.  We sort of gathered where they were because you would hear the news about the different regiments.  He was transferred to a Scottish regiment, the King’s Own Scottish Borderers and they were in the thick of the invasion.
MM:	What about when you first went over to England, in the years before D-Day, where would he have been then?
KT:	Well, he was down in [pause] we didn’t really know quite where he was, but he was down in training but I don’t know exactly where they were.
MM:	Did you get to see him?
KT:	Well, occasionally he would come up for a weekend but it was only very occasionally.
MM:	How did you manage – it must have been quite difficult living with people you hadn’t known before?
KT:	We got on very well.  They were very nice people.  My mother-in-law made me very welcome.  My father-in-law – he was actually just retired in 1938 from the police and of course, he had to take up a job and he became a night watchman, somewhere where they were doing some secret work.  He was on nights, which was a great strain for my mother-in-law because of the dog barking and the least little thing that woke him up during the day.  So we all had to [pause] we were all under a bit of a strain trying to keep quiet.  At weekends, he used to go in so we were able to let go a bit at the weekend [both laugh].  We used to do the housework when he went [laughs] he was a lovely man but he just had to sleep.  That’s right; we couldn’t let the dog bark or anything.
Is there anything else you want to know?  I feel very inadequate over this, really.
MM:	Oh, no.  I was fascinated by the fact that you were living with two women that you didn’t know and that you managed to get on together.  How did you manage the housework – did you share it out?
KT:	We did.  At weekends, I always helped and sort of did a few things.  My mother-in-law didn’t go out to work because she was over the age for going out but we used to share the chores.  Unfortunately, my sister-in-law was [pause] I mean she always was delicate, if you know what I mean, and didn’t really.  She was rather cosseted, you know, whereas I was always used to helping.  I had to help at home.  When we came in from school we had jobs to do so that in itself was a help to my mother-in-law because she was then suffering from arthritis and she found some things difficult.  I used to keep my own room neat and tidy and also I’d help her with the chores.  My father-in-law used to grow an awful lot of vegetables and food in the garden, because they had quite a bit of ground and he used to go shooting for rabbits, then.  My mother-in-law used to make a lovely rabbit pie.  Mind you, I wouldn’t have eaten it now [laughs] but we used to love it.  We used to love it [pause] she used to make a lovely rabbit pie.
MM:	That would have been a very good way of supplementing the rations.
KT:	I know.  Fruit and everything were so short.  Of course, we had to queue up for everything, for different things, you know.  In your lunch hour, if you heard somebody had some bananas or something you just gave up your lunch hour and queued to get the few bananas, or nylons, or whatever.  If you wanted makeup and you heard Boots had something in, you just had to queue up and to get it.  
MM:	Would this information come through word of mouth or was it advertised?
KT:	No, it would be through word of mouth.  Someone would say they saw something and they would say it to somebody else and so on that something was going.  Of course, the rations were very meagre, you know, sometimes it was only two ounces of butter for a week.  Fortunately, I didn’t like butter very much then but my mother, she always sent parcels over and we always got them all right.  She used to send butter and tea.  I don’t think she sent sugar; it was too scarce, dried fruit for making a cake.
MM:	But they were rationed here [Northern Ireland] as well, weren’t they?
KT:	Yes, they were rationed here but not to the extent that they were over there.  You could always get the bit extra here, you know, if somebody didn’t want something they’d give it to you in exchange for something else; probably sugar, or something like that.  My sister-in-law told me that I made her twenty-first birthday cake.  That was with stuff that my mother had sent over.
Queen Wilhelmina, you’ll have heard of Queen Wilhelmina, she was in a house in Maidenhead.  She came over with some of her bodyguards and we used to meet them at a sort of village hop, you know.  The village hop – somebody would play the piano and there was a bit of dancing and that sort of thing; that was about the only pleasurable thing we had.  Apart from walking and cycling.
MM:	Was there a cinema in Maidenhead?
KT:	No, we didn’t go to the cinema.  There was a cinema but we didn’t used to go.  But even then that was [pause] that was Cookham Dene, there was Cookham village – Cookham Rise and Cookham Dene, and they had three bombs dropped there.  I think they were trying for the airfield nearby.  We had the doodlebugs too, you’ll have heard of the doodlebugs?
MM:	Oh yes.  Were they over there as well?
KT:	Yes, we had one or two down there.  We heard them going over as well.
MM:	Were there many soldiers stationed in the area?
KT:	Quite a few, all round.
MM:	Would you have been conscious of them being there?  Would you meet them locally, in the village?
KT:	No, they were out dancing and that sort of thing.  The women’s [pause] the W.V.S. ran a canteen, so they were in there and that’s where I met my husband actually, in a W.V.S. canteen.  Also my sister, as well, she met her husband in a canteen.  We were both married within about a month of each other and she moved back to England to Reading, which really was only about twenty-five miles away from where I was.  We were [pause] it wasn’t too bad but she had to go into industry, not light industry like I was but quite heavy industry.
MM:	Would you have [pause] obviously the fact that you didn’t have children yourself made it easier, but would you have been aware of any arrangements being made for childcare for the women who worked with you?
KT:	I don’t know.  No, we didn’t really want them that much during the wartime and my husband wasn’t back that much really and it just happened then that I didn’t have children.  I was very sad for my husband because he would have liked to have children.  
MM:	A lot of women now are having to put off having children because of various pressures and then they find they can’t have them.  It must be very hard.
KT:	That’s right, they waited too long.  You don’t know do you but it wasn’t established that it was because we waited.  My twin brother died at birth and I’ve often wondered if that had anything to do with it.
MM:	My brother and sister are twins and they have a very special bond between them.  She would know immediately if something is wrong with him, although it doesn’t work both ways.
KT:	Yes.  I’ve heard of that sort of thing.
MM:	So where was it in Northern Ireland that the W.V.S. canteen where you met your husband?
KT:	Well, that was down in Portstewart.
MM:	And were you working at that time?
KT:	Yes, I was working and looking after an old lady and my sister was looking after her daughter.  She had come over from Sheffield with her two children and so we were both working in the same house, which was down the coast.
MM:	Was that what you had done since you left school?
KT:	Yes, that’s it, more or less, we just went straight from school to get those jobs.
MM:	When you were in England, how did you keep in touch with your family here in Ireland?
KT:	We used to write because not many people had phones then.  My in-laws didn’t have phones so we used to write and then sometimes we would visit.
MM:	Were you able to come back and forth?  Was it possible to get travel passes?
KT:	Not very often. My sister and I did it on our own.  We got a train up to Crewe and then on to Stranraer and over to Larne.  She did it once on her own when her husband couldn’t get a pass to come over.  People didn’t really like travelling across the sea at that time.
MM:	I suppose there was still a fear, that people were still anxious about the possibility of u-boat attacks?
KT:	Oh yes, very much so.  Sometimes when my husband was off we got a train up to London and we’d go round the shops, although there wasn’t much in the shops, and see a show.  Sometimes there would be air raids but you just had to get on with things.
MM:	I suppose people were determined not to let the war take over everything?
KT:	I think there were good times, that in wartime there were good times, everybody helped each other.  People thought nothing of helping one another with rations and exchanging things.
MM:	Do you think that the sense of shared danger had anything to do with that?
KT:	I would say so, yes.
MM:	The sort of work that you were doing – was that the kind of thing that would have been done by men before the war?
KT:	No, I don’t think so.  The industry was just set up for the war, it was a jewellers before then.
MM:	I presume that it closed down after the war?
KT:	It closed down, yes, as things got back to more normal way of going on.  The contract was finished then but I was still eligible to go to work and they were going to put me on the buses.
MM:	As a driver or a conductor?
KT:	As a conductor, but anyway, I said no to that and then they put me up to Slough, which was the nearest town, it’s a very industrial area, Slough in Berkshire, or is it Buckinghamshire?  So that was working with [pause] I presume it was things to do with aircraft but they never really said.  It was like a small television and you had to work on those and assemble those.  There was always people there to help you.  I didn’t like it much because it was a different class [pause] I’m not a snob but it was a different class of people up there, they were more factory people.  
MM:	They were people who’d always worked in a factory?
KT:	Yes, they’d always worked in factories.
MM:	Were these women who were used to working outside the home, not just for war work?
KT:	Yes.
MM:	What about women who had families?  Were arrangements made for childcare for them?
KT:	I don’t think so because there were no crèches or anything in these places.  Not like they are now so I think they just had to leave them with relatives, that’s the way, or make sure they were in school.  Or they just had to work part-time and manage that way.
MM:	Shopping must have been difficult when you had to rely on your lunch hour to queue for goods?  It must have made the day seem long?
KT:	It did, it did.  Fortunately, my mother-in-law knew the butcher and the grocer, he was just down the road, and the butcher was [pause] he knew the whole community and if there were anything going, he’d let her know.
MM:	What did you do, did you share the cooking or did she do it?
KT:	No, she did the cooking.  I used to help with the washing up.  She was used to doing thing her way.  There’s no room for two women in a kitchen [laughs].  
MM:	My son used to do the cooking; he was very good.  I’d be quite happy to give it up to anybody [both laugh].
Can you remember what sort of money you were being paid?  Was it weekly?
KT:	Well, I think it was about £4 a week.
MM:	That wasn’t bad, compared to the average wage at the time.
KT:	No, it was not bad; I think it had increased when I left to about £5.  Yes, they were very fair payers but of course, nowadays you would think that was terrible but even then; that was very good then.
MM:	Did you pay your mother-in-law for your keep?
KT:	Yes.  She only used to take [pause] I think it was 10s.  I’d give her 10s and she didn’t want any more.  I would have paid her more but she was getting the rations and she said, the more rations you have, the better it went round.
MM:	How did you manage to save when you were buying your house?  You were saying you bought a cottage at the end of the war?
KT:	Yes, we managed [pause] I was getting an allowance for my husband from the army and I managed to save all of that.  Then we rented this cottage to start and then we had the chance to buy it.  I think it was a case of scraping everything together but we managed and then we moved on to a semi-detached house in Maidenhead.  That was a nice house, very comfortable and then we moved out to a nice bungalow.  We’ve been in bungalows ever since.  We were in a bungalow when we retired down to Dorset.
MM:	Even though you lived in England for so long, you still have a very definite Irish accent.  
KT:	Have I – I don’t know about that [laughs].
MM:	Oh yes, but was there ever at any stage the suggestion from people that you were alien, being Irish?
KT:	No, not at all.  I think that in the sense that I was working with a nice lot of people and I made some great friends.  Some of them are dead now, unfortunately, but I did make some quite good friends.  No, I didn’t feel that.  On the whole, I was very happy with my mother-in-law.  She was a very nice lady and having my sister-in-law there.  She wasn’t married [pause] we hoped she would have married one of the Dutchmen but she didn’t like the idea of moving away and having to leave her parents.
MM:	I take it there was no question that he would move permanently to England?
KT:	No, they were very dedicated to Queen Wilhelmina and they would go where wherever she was.  The Dutch people were very nice, very blond and tall.
MM:	You were saying at the beginning that your mother wasn’t thrilled about your marrying an Englishman until she met him.  Was that because of nationalist feelings or because she knew you would leave and go to England?
KT:	Possibly, I don’t know – but I suppose it was more the thought of us going away; I think it would have been one of the factors until she met him but she took to him straight away when she met him.  I mean she had the same situation with my sister’s husband as well; he was in the forces as well.  She corresponded with my mother-in-law but they never did meet.  
MM:	Was that because of the circumstances of war that travelling was difficult?
KT:	Well, people didn’t travel as much then, not like they do now.  My mother was home with my brothers and she wouldn’t leave them.  I think women were more dedicated to their families then than they do now.
MM:	How many were in your family?
KT:	Two brothers and two sisters.  My younger brother [pause] the reason I came over here was that my younger brother, his wife had died suddenly and my husband had died suddenly as well so I came over here to sort of be company for him.  And then he died of cancer.
MM:	That must have been difficult.
KT:	Anyway, I did think of going back but then I thought it would be such upheaval to go back and I stayed here.
MM:	It sounds as if you had a good circle of friends in England.
KT:	Yes, they’ve been very good.  In fact, I’ve just had a six-page letter from one of them [laughs].  Then I’ve got my niece here, the daughter of the brother who died.  She’s got two boys, seventeen and fourteen.  
MM:	One of the themes that have run through other interviews is the belief that although materially people in Ireland and England are much better off, that as you said in the war the capacity of people to help each other, that in Ireland now that is being lost.
KT:	Yes, there has been tremendous change but I think for better.
MM:	Would that be because people are so much better off?
KT:	Well, I think people are more broad-minded now, oh yes, sure people travel more now, don’t they?
MM:	A lot of people have remarked that the closeness that was there in the war years that you don’t see much of that now.
KT:	No, you don’t see so much of it.  But things are better now here than they were, with regards to religion.  People are not so fanatical about being Protestant or Catholic.  In England, of course, you don’t get that.  They don’t care what their neighbour is.  I think it’s a big improvement here.  
(Last five minutes of interview dealt with local conditions in Portstewart.)

Kathleen, 29th November 2003

KT1

