Letty and Josie, Dublin.  Interview: 2nd December 2002

LC:	I was born at 26 Northbrook Terrace, North Strand.  Yes, the North Strand, and in nineteen hundred and eighteen I was born.
LC:	Okay, my full name, my marriage name, that’s Mrs. Letitia C., Letty C., whatever you like.  [Laughs].  That’s what I was christened anyway, Letitia.  If you like now, I’ll give you Letty.
MM:	It doesn’t matter – whatever you’re most comfortable using.  When you were born in the North Strand, where did you come in the family?
LC:	I was the first.  There were four of us, four, three girls, and a boy.  
MM:	And what did your parents do?
LC:	Well, my mother didn’t work – she was a housewife and my father was an electrician, on the trains, yes.  
MM:	Did your mother ever work outside the home?
LC:	No, she never worked.  People never worked in those days, you’d be looked down upon if you were working at that time [laughs] that was the attitude at that time, you know.  [Laughs].  
MM:	Well, I really meant had she done paid work after she was married, because she probably worked extremely hard in the home.
LC:	No, she worked in Jacobs, the biscuit factory, you see, and that was all.  Then she got married and she had four children.  Josie was the youngest of the four children.
MM:	Josie, perhaps you’d introduce yourself for the tape, please?
JW:	Well, I’m Josephine W. and I was born in the Rotunda Hospital in October 1926.  I lived in Northbrook Terrace, yes, for a long time, and then moved to Dowth Avenue in Cabra in 1937.
MM:	Were they the new houses?
JW:	They were, yes, they weren’t long built at the time.  They were built [pause] after the war they got rid of all the tenements, although we didn’t come from the tenement houses, there was a lot of clearing out of the city, you see, and all those houses were built at the time.  Through Sean T. O’Kelly, he was the man that forged that all along.  They rid Dublin of the tenements because there was such devastation in them.  So that’s how that we moved up there, it was a purchased house in Dowth Avenue.  There were other cheaper kinds of houses too, on Attracta Road.  
Well, then, I went to the Holy Faith Convent school in Glasnevin and I left, as usual, at fourteen and went to work at the sewing and during the war, then, the years during the war, we remember the blackout.
MM:	Can I just hold you there for a minute and we can move on to the war then?  Letty, did you leave school when you were fourteen as well?
LC:	I did, yes.  I went into the sewing as well.
MM:	Did you go straight from school to work?
LC:	It was in Abbey Street, the Abbey Clothing Company.  Well, I went into the Tech first, when I left school I went into the Tech.  That was what was done at that time.  How long was I there?  Two years, I think, and then I got into the Abbey Clothing Company.  I was put in [pause] they were looking for workers then [pause] I was called in by the forewoman there.  
MM:	Was this for men or women?
LC:	It was mixed, kind of, it was ladies and gents worked there at the clothing.
MM:	One thing I know about the clothing trade at the time is that men were paid much more than women for the same work.  Would you have been conscious of this at the time?
LC:	I don’t really remember that.  Where I worked, it was a huge big place and it was mostly all women.  There was only a few men underneath.  They used to be doing the cutting, they used to cut out all the cloth but we didn’t have much to do with them.
JW:	It was the wages, like that.
LC:	Well, the wages were like; the men’s were much more than the women’s weren’t they?  
JW:	Women didn’t earn as much as men in those days.  There was a big distinction in the wages.
LC:	Well, there had to be because the wages – the men would have to give them up for their families and everything.  
MM:	Would the women not have to do the same thing?
LC:	Well, the women didn’t work, you see?  Once they were married.
JW:	Well, they worked in the home.
LC:	Nobody worked in those days.  You’d be looked down, if he hadn’t work, like that, a woman would, oh yes.  It’d be: she married that fellow there and she has to go out and work for him.  You got all this [laughs].  It was a different world altogether than now.
MM:	In the sewing factory would you have had a supervisor, telling you what to do?
LC:	Oh gosh yes, a forewoman.  We had a very stiff forewoman, Miss Tobin, she used to be chasing us, watching you going into the toilet, you know, she was a terror.
JW:	She’d keep an eye on how long you’d spend and when you came in and that.
LC:	Yes, the terrible hours you’d have to start work.  You’d clock in at eight o’clock in the morning and then work to half past six at night.  It was an awfully long day.  The only thing was that we didn’t have to work on Saturdays.  You’d have Saturday off and Sunday but the hours were very long.  Half six, I wouldn’t get home until really well after seven o’clock.  
MM:	Did you get breaks during the day?
LC:	Oh, they had their break of course, an half and a half.  You’d work till a quarter past twelve so it was an hour and a quarter, yes. 
MM:	And did you stay around for lunch?
LC:	I used to go home.
JW:	Well, you were gone to England, Letty.
LC:	Oh, that was the war, the war years.  That was a different time altogether, going into the war years, everything was rationed and it was a different world altogether.
MM:	How long were you in the sewing factory?
LC:	Let me see, I must have been in it about three years before I went to England.  And I was about four years in England, nearly four years in England.  And then I came back then, the war was over in England, and I came back then and I went back into the job that I originally started in.  They were all getting in all the material, it was all coming back then so it was starting up again because the war was over.
MM:	What made you decide to go to England?
LC:	Well, I had to go.  There was no work.
JW:	You were laid off.
LC:	We were laid off, yes, there was no material coming in, you see, there was nothing coming in.  Everything was stopped.  You see, the people that didn’t live through it, they don’t know how bad it was.
JW:	Everything was stopped, it was very hard.  There was no coal, and wet turf.
LC:	That’s right.  The winter was very bad.
JW:	The glimmer man was there and you’d only an hour or so for the gas, it was watched, and your mother would be sending you out to watch if he was coming.
JW:	Oh yes.
LC:	And he’d come in then and he’d have to feel the gas to see was it hot.
MM:	That was the glimmer man?
LC:	[Laughs] Yes, that’s it, the glimmer man.  We’d be all amused but that was the name because he was checking for a glimmer, you see.  [Laughs]
JW:	And the shell cocoa because there was no tea.
LC:	[Laughs] And my mother used always have her kettle on the glimmer – she was a devil for the teapot.
MM:	Someone was telling me that the shell cocoa that was used in the war to make drinks is now used as a fertiliser and you can get it in garden centres.  [All laugh.]
JW:	Saint Anthony, when I think of all the shell cocoa we boiled, and we’re still here. 
LC:	So there you are.  [All laugh.]
MM:	So how did you go about getting a job in England?  Did you apply from here?
LC:	Oh I went to [pause] at that time they wouldn’t take you from here, because there was a war on, so you had to be thoroughly examined before you went.
MM:	So what did that involve?
LC:	Oh, I had to be thoroughly examined, back and front and everywhere [laughs].  I’ll never forget it.  If I knew what I’d be going to go through, I’d never have gone near them.
MM:	Was this at the British Embassy?
LC:	Here, no, it was our own.  Though it was probably through them, like, you had to be [pause] it was probably the Patrick Duns but however, anyway, as time went on I was three and a half years there, or four.  
JW:	You were four.
MM:	What part of England were you in?
LC:	I was in Reading, it was forty miles outside London.  I was in a lovely place.  We never heard bombs in it and London was about forty miles away.  Oh, I was three and a half years in it.
MM:	And why did you leave, was it the end of a contract?
LC:	Well, I was sent by the Labour Exchange here.  That was the way you’d go.  You couldn’t go tiddling like, just go over yourself at that time, you had to be sent.
MM:	So the British Labour Exchange worked through same one here?
LC:	Yes, that’s the way they worked at that time.  I went with a couple of other girls I was working with.  I think a whole lot of us, like, we were only in our twenties when we went.  And we said there’s no sign of this war being over so we had better go and do something, you know?  There was no work and you only had about 12s.  a week coming off the Labour that was the money at the time. And my goodness, sure you’d give that up to your mother so you’d no money left, like, you know?  And so I decided to sign up and some others, you know the way the word goes round, and they took our names and so we were signed on.  And I was sent then for a thorough examination.  And then, so anyway, we all passed.  Most of the girls who went were all passed.  It was a lovely time we had.  When we went over we were welcomed and everything and when we went we couldn’t believe it, we were brought into a beautiful place.  It was like a hotel, but it wasn’t, it was fixed up just for the girls.
MM:	Like a hostel?
LC:	Kind of a hostel, yes, that’s what you’d call it.  Everything was great there; it was just like that things were rationed, like, but we got our three meals a day and of course the canteen where we worked was wonderful, you know.  You mightn’t get what you liked, what you fancied, but it was all there for you, you wouldn’t starve.  
MM:	What sort of work were you doing?
LC:	It was just like [pause] I had a handy little job, it was just at a little bench and you’d be sitting there.  It was a machine, a small machine, and there’d be powder in it, of course, that was the dangerous part and it was for bullets, of course, so you’d have to be careful.
MM:	So you were actually making munitions?
LC:	Oh munitions, yes, we’d be cutting the thing – one machinist would set the charge and another one would press it.  Well, I was always the one would press it.  
MM:	So if you pressed it too hard, it could be dangerous?
LC:	Oh gosh, yes, oh it did once or twice [laughs].  
MM:	What happened?
LC:	Nothing really, it would just give a bang, you know [laughs].  
MM:	Now did you get any training for this?
LC:	Oh yes, you were shown how to do everything.
MM:	And who would do the training?
LC:	Ah, there was a forewoman of course, and there was men there and all as well and they’d go round watching that you were doing it right.
JW:	It was a dangerous job.
LC:	It was, it was a very dangerous job, yes, it was.  Because I was on high explosives, I was on TNT, yes, that’s right.  I was on one of the highest explosives in it [laughs].  Well, I wasn’t the only one, there were crowds of girls around me.  But you had to be well, your health had to be good, you had to be passed by the doctor.  
MM:	I suppose you’d have to be able to stay calm, at least.
LC:	That’s right, you had to be passed by the doctor.  
MM:	And were you doing that work for your whole time in England?
LC: 	We were transferred from Reading right up to the north of England, up to [pause] what do you call it, Lancashire.  We were up there when I finished up there.
MM:	You weren’t given a choice about staying on?
LC:	Oh no, when you were finished you had to leave.
MM:	Were there English people working in the factory as well?
LC:	Ah yes, we were mixed with them, we just the same as them.
MM:	And how was that?
LC:	Oh that was fine, there was never any bother.
MM:	Was there any resentment that Southern Ireland was neutral?
LC:	Oh not at all, there was nothing like that.  We all just had a laugh together, sure they’d say anything [laughs].  No, there was never anything like that.  They were very nice, a bit cheeky.
MM:	And what about the pay? Was that good?
LC:	Oh well, it was good considering what you’d get here [laughs].  It was really.  I used to send Mammy home money, I know that.
JW:	Always, every Tuesday, she used to get the money every Tuesday.
LC:	That’s right.  It was marvellous.
MM:	Who was at home still?  Your Dad, your Mum and you, Josie?
JW:	I was at home, yes.  And my brother went too.  He joined the air force, he got sent to Palestine.  And I was still here.
LC:	The RAF. 
JW:	I’d another sister, and there was nothing here at those times and I remember her going off all around Crumlin and she’d go from door to door and she selling pipe cleaners.  That was all she could get.  In the summer she went out and she picked strawberries.  That was all she could do: things were so hard in this country at that time.  
MM:	What about your father?
JW:	He was working, but he was away.  He was an electrician and he used to go down the country, like that, at times, you know, and he’d be away for a long time, you know.
MM:	All through the war, then, even though you were in England, did you ever get the chance to come home for a holiday?
LC:	Oh yes, we did.
JW:	She used to come home for about two weeks and my brother was the same, in the air force.  And Lilly, she was out in Crumlin selling pipe cleaners.
LC:	But she was at the sewing too.
JW:	But sure there was no sewing, it was awful, she wasn’t working at the time.  
LC:	 Sure they were doing all the army work, for the army, that’s right.  Do you remember? They were earning great money that time.  
MM:	This was the Irish army?
LC:	The Irish army, yes. And the Americans.  Ah yes, they were doing sewing for the Americans  - they always wanted very fancy work.
JW:	It just kind of took a turn after that, that things got better.
LC:	It was the first year or two that was very hard.  You know, everything was off.  And then the bombing of the North Strand.
JW:	And then the bombing of the North Strand – it was very close.
MM:	Were you still living down there then?
JW:	I remember that night.  No, no, we had moved.
MM:	Did you know anyone who was bombed?
JW:	No, we didn’t, we weren’t in that part of the North Strand, we were down over the bridge.  We weren’t living there at that time, we were in Cabra at that time, 1941.  
MM:	It did a lot of damage.
LC:	Oh yes, it did, bless us and save us.  I remember that night well.  I was on the landing when I heard Mammy.  Well, when I looked out, I pulled back the blind and looked out and all you could see was lights, you know, big lights.  
JW:	So she heard the bomb, like she woke me up.
LC:	She did, I’ll always remember.  We were all stood on that little landing in Cabra and I’ll always remember, she put her arms around us and she said, now, said she, if we’re going, we’ll all go together.  I can still see her that night.
MM:	And was your father away at the time?
LC:	He was, yes.
MM:	So your mother really held you together?
LC:	She did yes, my mother really reared us, she did, yes.  
JW:	 It was hard but everyone seemed happy and I remember going to the ceilidh, in the Mansion House. That went on in the blackout, and no one then was afraid of anything.
MM:	It must have been quite difficult in complete darkness.
JW:	Yes, and nobody [pause] you must have, everybody had to have a navy blind on the window, you must have that.  Everywhere was pitch dark but we used to go to the Mansion House on a Saturday night to the ceilidh and we’d come home.  We’d walk all the way from the Mansion House and nobody had any fear, no bother, nobody would touch you or say a word.  And today everywhere is lit up and everybody is terrified. 
LC:	You know, they’d come on bikes and we’d get crossbars.  If fellows had a few bicycles, we’d get on to the crossbar coming home because there was no transport.  
JW:	You couldn’t get transport.
LC:	Unless you had the money for a cab, you could get a horse and car [both laugh].  That’s all there was like, at the time.
MM:	And your bicycle lights, did you have to keep them dimmed?
LC:	Oh yes, we did.  
JW:	I don’t remember that.
MM:	They couldn’t shine up, they could only shine down on the ground so they probably weren’t much use.
LC:	Oh yes, you had to keep them dim, they could just shine on the ground, yes.  That was the order of the day, I know that, and everybody had the black blinds.  When I got married, we still had the black blinds and the whites.
LC:	It was well for young people going through it.  I wouldn’t want to be going through it now.  
MM:	After your mother had seen what could happen after bombing raids, in the North Strand, how did she feel about you going to England where it was much more likely to happen?
LC:	Oh, she was very upset, she was.  When I told her, she was very upset, she was crying.  She went out to Dun Laoghaire with me and she was crying.  But she knew I had to go because of the work.  After we were finished, like, when you’d got what you were paid back like, your social welfare, well that only lasted for six months so you had to go after whatever there was, like, there was no choice.  At that time, the labour was only a few shillings and that’s when I went, like, when I was cut off the labour and there was nothing else coming in.  There was a few other girls went and they were cut off.  We went over anyway to the Labour Exchange and told them we were at the sewing.  So we went up and signed and we went over, even though there were the blackouts and the rationing and everything.
MM:	Was that your first time away from home on your own?
LC:	It was.
MM:	It must have been quite frightening really, in a strange country in wartime.
LC:	I don’t know; I kind of got used to it after a few days.  I was very much homesick for the first few days, and a couple of the girls said to me you won’t stick it, we know by the look of you, but I did [laughs].  I couldn’t go back, what was I going back to, you know? [laughs] 
MM:	So it wasn’t that you were getting a better job, it was that it was a paid job when there was nothing here.
LC:	That’s it.  You had to work and at that time, there wasn’t anything.  But I think it was a couple of months after that they started getting in, they got a big contract for the army, where I worked, and it kind of kept them going.  I could have stayed or I could have went at that stage, but I was happier where I was. I liked England.  So I stayed there until the war was over and then I came back.
MM:	I suppose you knew the money was sure to last there?
LC:	That’s right, yes.  So I stayed there till the war was over and they didn’t need us.
MM:	What was it like coming back?
LC:	I didn’t mind it.  I went back to the job I was in before so I knew all the girls in it, like. Then I met my husband and got married [laughs].
MM:	Coming back, was it hard after living away to come back and have your mother telling you what to do?
LC:	No, I had a good [pause] no, it wasn’t hard.  She wasn’t telling me really, and you could bring anyone in, she made everybody welcome, like.  I made a few friends, like May, that were working with me and they used to come up regularly and we’d go out.  
MM:	Had they gone to England with you?
LC:	Yes, where I worked in England.
MM:	Have you stayed in touch with them?
LC:	Well, she died and I don’t know, I’ve heard the husband is bad but I don’t know.  You lose touch.
MM:	Were you at school during the war years? [To Josie]
JW:	I was at school, well, for a good while I was at school and then I left like that and went into the sewing, like Letty, that was all there was, like, when you left school at fourteen.
MM:	What year was that?
JW:	I would have left school about 1940.
MM:	So it was still wartime?
JW:	Oh yes, definitely. 
MM:	And were you able to get a job when you left?
JW:	No, no, I wasn’t.  A bit of a job in Grafton Street and then it closed down.  There was no work.
LC:	There was no work.
JW:	No, I was at home, most of the time, you know.
MM:	So were you entitled to the dole or social welfare or had you not enough stamps if you hadn’t been working?
JW:	Oh, I was entitled to it, yes, but it was very small.  I think it was something like about thirteen shillings at the time. Yes.  That was all it was at that time.  That was the social welfare, or whatever they called it at that time.
MM:	So you were both very aware of the need to contribute to the family income?
JW:	Yes, indeed, no doubt about it.
MM:	And were you doing, as well as doing your job, were you doing work at home, in the sense of housework? 
JW:	Well, I wouldn’t have been so much because I got very sick with TB at the time, and I was about four years in the sanitorium, which at the time [pause] there was an awful lot of people laid low with that, as you might know at the time, with the result then that I was four years away so I wasn’t doing much at home.  I had it in the hip and I was away four years there.  I had to learn to walk again, after that.  I would have been about eighteen when I got that, you know.  Thank God I made a great recovery.  I had wonderful care but at the time it was very hard.
MM:	They were very important years?
JW:	They were, it would have been from when I was about 18 to when I was about 22 or 24 I was there and it meant I’d no job or anything.  But I got the thirteen shillings social welfare, whatever it was at that time, you know but I never worked after that.  I got married and had four children after that.  So that’s Joan [laughs, indicating her daughter].
LC:	You’ve five children [laughs] you’re forgetting that, she’s five of them [laughs again].  
JW:	I was married in 1953 and I never looked back.  But at that time, there was an awful lot of people with ill health and at that time, in those years, when I was out in Crooksling – I think it’s an old person’s home or something now, it’s closed.
MM:	Did anybody else in the family get TB:
JW:	No, nobody.  You see [pause] I hadn’t it in the chest even though I was sent out there, they were afraid, but it was in the hip, I had it in the hip.  But that’s how I wasn’t working.  I would have wanted to get a job but I just had to stop and when I came home then it took time to get back into everything after being away such a long time.  But I pulled through, I got over it and as I say, for the time I got the best of care, the best of care.
MM:	And were your family able to visit you?
JW:	Oh golly, yes, every Sunday and on a Wednesday. 
MM:	It would have been hard enough without being isolated as well.
JW:	I was on a frame for a year or two and after another year, I was kind of coming through it and I was learning to walk.  I’d no power in the legs after being tied so long, you know?  I spent about four years, four Christmases in it, and I never could get home.  The other patients could get home but it depended on the way you were, you know, but like that now, I got great attention, I must say.  Wonderful attention at the hospital, I really can’t say enough for them.  I really thought I could just get up off the frame and I’d be all right but it hadn’t got any better, it had got worse.  So they decided to operate then, in Jervis Street.
MM:	Would you have been aware of the all the efforts of Dr. Noel Browne in relation to TB and trying to fight it?
JW:	I was, yes, certainly it was all the talk of the place out there.  And give him his due, he was a wonderful man, he got a pension then for the TB sufferers.  They’d had nothing before that, nothing at all, and he forced all that through.  He was a wonderful man, really, he was a wonderful man.  He never stopped trying to help people.  Really and truly, a grand man, he was, he deserves great credit.  It’s only people that had suffered like that and realised, realised what a great man he was, you know, really and truly.
MM:	So you remember him clearly?
JW:	Oh yes, he died there about two or three years ago. It could be more than that, the way time goes by, you know, but I remember that man well, coming out to see us and everything.  He was a great man.  And another great man was Mr. Murray from Jervis Street. He was wonderful man, too, the way they looked after us.  Great people, they were, really, no doubt about it.  Wonderful people they were.  I had the operation in Jervis Street at the time and then went back there again for treatment.
MM:	For physiotherapy?
JW:	Yes, treatment.  They were great because there wasn’t much in those days, you know, everything was kind of rationed and scarce, you know, and only certain people got a bit of butter.  I got butter on my dinner [laughs] and I got an egg every morning.  Well, other patients didn’t get that, you know.  
MM:	I’ve never understood, to be honest, why butter had to be rationed since there was so much of it being produced at home.
JW:	Yes, well, there you are, at that time.  I was lucky because I got the bit of butter for my dinner and I got the egg in the morning.  Well, there was other people didn’t get it, you know, and then I got a bit of chicken and other patients used to say, oh did you get chicken? [laughs] That was a sign you were going home, that meant you were dying, you know? [all laugh], Oh Josie, did you get the bit of chicken, you must be going home.  There were all these kinds of jokes, I must say, they were all very happy people, I must say that, they were wonderful. 
MM:	I think people seem to have coped better with hardship then.
JW:	They did, people are not able for hardship now. No, indeed, it was tough enough.  We made a joke of it, like, you know. 
LC:	Yes.  
MM:	In one way, while things might have been bad, it seemed that people appreciated more what they had. Would you agree?
JW:	It does good to some having it hard.  It didn’t worry you, like, you’d no money and that was that. Yes, and you’d to join a shoe club to buy a pair of shoes. You’d join the shoe club in Bolgers or somewhere, and you’d have to pay in over ten or twelve weeks to buy a pair of shoes.  You’d be waiting on the shoes and then the club would start again.  You’d join it again, maybe at 2s a week, then your number would come up again and maybe in another ten weeks you’d get another pair of shoes [laughs].
MM:	So you expected that when you went to work your money would go into the family budget, that you wouldn’t just have it for yourself?
JW:	Oh yes, well that was the way it was.  Oh, you came home with your money intact.  I had 10s when I started first, and I’ll always remember the 10s note. And I walked straight home, I wouldn’t even get the bus.  I’d walk from Grafton Street.  I worked up in Grafton Street at a place called Tysons, and I’d walk from there right home to Cabra and I’d hand up that even 10s because I wouldn’t even take the bus fare out of it.
MM:	That reminds me of one of the women I interviewed in Belfast who told me the story of when she worked in Woolworths during the war.  They used to work very late and one Christmas Eve she was there until one o’clock in the morning and she walked home.  She wouldn’t break her money to get a taxi home and she walked home in the dark.  She wouldn’t [pause] even though her mother said she should have broken it; she wouldn’t do it without  asking her.
JW:	No, we were the same.  I always remember, I would walk sometimes from Grafton Street at lunchtime down to the, like, it was the Pillar that was there at the time, and I’d get the number 10 bus as far as Doyle’s Corner.  I’d have to get out at Doyle’s Corner because I wouldn’t have the extra halfpenny to bring me up to Cabra.  It was three halfpence to Cabra - a penny and a halfpenny and your penny would bring you to Doyle’s Corner and if you hadn’t got the other halfpenny, you’d get out and you’d walk.  And then I used to meet Paddy Tracey and get a crossbar home [laughs].  I used to be delighted to see Paddy, and you know, I met him there after a couple of years and he said to me, ah Josie, I’d kiss you only I’m afraid I’d be arrested.  You see the way things are gone.  You know now, you can’t even embrace a person, in case there was something weird or something.  Says he, I’m afraid I’d be arrested [laughs].  
MM:	I take it he’d have given you a crossbar the rest of the way?
JW:	Yes.  Like, money was so scarce - it was so scarce.
MM:	Yes, even people who were fairly well paid have remarked on how much more difficult it was to manage then.
JW:	Yes, and that time you see, if people had houses or anything, you see there was mortgage and there was rates, and there was ground rent, you see.
LC:	There was an awful outlay on a person’s purse, there was really.  
MM:	Would you know, between your parents, how was the decision made to move to a purchase house?  
JW:	Oh it would have been my mother.  She was in bad health in the North Strand, it was too damp for her and she suffered from her chest.  She’d get very bronchial colds she’d get, and it was the doctor, Dr. Ryan who said she’d have to get out of the low lying district to get any relief.  Which she did, when she moved up to Cabra she did improve, you know, didn’t she, Letty?  Health wise she did, yes. 
MM:	How would they have gone about getting a mortgage?
JW:	Oh she paid the rent, she paid the rent to the Corporation whatever it was at the time, eleven shillings I think, at the time, and she’d be paying it that way.
MM:	One woman I’ve heard of, she was buying her house from the Corporation when her husband got very sick and just had a small disability pension coming in but she wouldn’t give up because she wanted to buy the house out.
JW:	Oh yes, she was buying it too, it was a purchased house, that was the way it was, you know.  She bought the interest off [pause] there was another family in it before her, you know, and she took it over from them.  An uncle left her a little bit of money and she put it down on the house, so it would be her house.  
MM:	And how would she have gone about furnishing it?
JW:	Well, she had her own furniture from the other house, oh lord yes, from the time she was married.  
MM:	So when you two got married, how did you go about setting up your own homes?  I take it you were still handing up your wages to your mother?
JW:	Well, Mammy died in 1950, she died before I got married and Letty’s still in the house.  She and her husband went in there when they got married.
MM:	So what about you?
JW:	I moved out.  
MM:	Was your mother still around then?
JW:	No, no, she was dead.  I got married in 1953 and she was dead then.  I moved down to Great Western Square, where I am still.  My husband’s father was an engine driver and they had one of the railway houses and that went like from father to son and eventually they sold the houses, the railway sold the houses, so everybody owns them now.   
MM:	Was your husband an engine driver?
JW:	He was a fitter, in CIE, but still like those houses were only allotted to people who worked directly on the railway and he was more like the buses end, you know, but in the days before that the people had to get out.  When they came to retirement they had to get out.  Oh indeed, it was dreadful, they had to get out.  They only got six months, six months and if they weren’t out in six months their furniture was put out on the street.  I remember seeing that as a young one, their furniture was put out if they weren’t out in the six months.  That’s the way it was.  Then eventually then the railway sold it to the people that were in it.  So, I suppose the railway now is regretting it because they’re getting any amount of money for them now. [Laughs]  And CIE is always broke as you know.  So they sold their gold mine.  People are getting four hundred thousand now for them.
MM:	It must have been very difficult when people were in that situation – social welfare was tiny and the old age pension was very small.
LC:	Very small, yes, indeed, very small.  The old age pension was very small.
MM:	It was about ten shillings at the time.
LC: 	Ten shillings?  Imagine trying to survive on that.  It was a struggle.
MM:	 One difference that’s become obvious to me between Dublin and Belfast is that at the end of the war [pause] where before the war conditions were much the same for ordinary people but there was more building going on down here, well all that stopped then and the situation changed and reversed.
JW:	Exactly.
MM:	And then after the war, it changed because Belfast was better off as Northern Ireland did better with social welfare and a huge building programme and new schools.  Where we were going into the late 1940s and 50s with high unemployment and very little in the line of help from the state.
JW:	It was nothing, nothing.  But then, we were such a young country, you know, the money wasn’t there after the British pulled out.  And you know, the country is still very wrong.  But some people, the older people weren’t very much for the independence, they were more or less happy with the British.  Some of the older generation, my mother’s generation now, would say, and my husband’s father’s generation would say - my father-in-law would say, if they get their freedom they’ll fight among themselves.  And like, he was right, it happened in 1922, you know.  And that’s the way they thought about it.  A lot of that age group thought about it like that.
MM:	What do you think of Ireland’s neutrality during the war and part of the reason that De Valera kept us neutral because it was a new nation and still trying to make a separate identity?
LC:	De Valera used to come out against them and they’d say burn everything British but their ships and their coal [laughs].  There were all these sayings, you know, and the song about Sean McEntee and his half ounce of tea [laughs].  
JW:	He kept giving us the brown bread with the half ounce of tea, yes, and I’ll always remember there was no fruit.  I’ll always remember the first time I smelled an orange, I thought it was the loveliest thing.  I thought it was magnificent.  Everything was gone, there were no oranges, no fruit of any description.  And then the oranges came in and I’ll always remember the smell of the orange, to this day, I remember the smell of the orange and I thought it was the loveliest smell I ever got.
MM:	A woman who was talking to me was telling me about a woman bringing lemons into hospital and she remembers the smell and even now she remembers how she felt and it brings it all back to her.
JW:	I remember I was in the Mater Hospital at the time and somebody came up to me and brought me the orange and it was absolutely wonderful.  I hadn’t had an orange for a couple of years, you know, and the bananas, they were wonderful.  We had apples, we were all right for apples because we’d our own applies.
MM:	The diet was probably healthier with such low fat, it was much better.
JW:	There was no fat.  Probably better.
LC:	But there was no nourishment in it, that brown bread, there was no nourishment in it.  People didn’t want to eat it and the butter was rationed.  Like the butter was six ounces each and there was six ounces of sugar and the ounce of tea.  
JW:	I remember on a Friday my mother would give all the rations out.  Now make it do, she’d say, because you’re not getting mine and we’d all get our little piece, you know.  There was no much rationed.  Were the sausages and rashers rationed?
LC:	I can’t remember, but probably.
JW:	Letty had plenty of food but we hadn’t here.  
MM:	The rationing was much stricter in Britain than here.
JW:	And yet Letty had plenty over there, it was much better than here.
LC:	I don’t think so, because we used to have beautiful white bread, yes, we did.  Anything I could get.
MM:	Was this maybe because you were working in the munitions industry?
LC:	It could be that - that we were getting the extra, like.  It probably was that, because of the war work.
JW:	Letty used to come home loaded for Christmas, you know. 
Indecipherable section – much laughter.
MM:	And were you able to travel every year for Christmas?
LC:	Twice a year, yes, I was paid for it.  I didn’t have to pay, I got it twice a year.  But if you went more than that you’d have to pay yourself, you know.
MM:	So you’d no problems getting travel permits?
LC:	Ah yes, you could but people didn’t like travelling because of all the submarines.  People wanted to stay at home.  Like, you were all right coming across but a couple of times coming across, you’d be worried and you’d see the planes.  It was just some times that things were bad.  Everybody had someone who was bombed in England at that time, you know?  They might be working or their families [pause] they were in the army.
JW:	A lot of people like, just went off and were killed, you know?
MM:	And was your brother okay?
JW:	Oh like, he was great, he was three or four years in Palestine and he came back after.  They were very good, he got a lot of money coming out and looked after him very well.
MM:	Was he a pilot?
JW:	No, he wasn’t a pilot, he was on the ground, the ground staff, you know.
MM:	So he got a good training?
JW:	He did, yes, and he wanted for nothing.  He came home and he was in the Holy Land and everywhere.  He saw a lot of places and it was grand, you know.
MM:	Did you know many people who joined up?
JW:	There were a fair few.  They went off and never came back, like, you know?
MM:	And were they mentioned in the papers when this happened?
JW:	No, I don’t think so.
MM:	I’m just thinking that the censorship here meant that war news didn’t get into the papers, that the war was barely mentioned.
JW:	Oh well, this was it, but it was all mentioned about Dev when he wouldn’t give them the ports.  I remember that he said they told him if he would give the ports … [Indecipherable for three minutes of tape]
MM:	I was just wondering if, when you went to England, or anyone like your brother went to join the British forces, if they met any prejudice here in Dublin against doing that?
JW:	No, not at all, they went off and they joined up and they have this memorial now and everything for them, do you see? 
LC:	Only lately, as you know.  Most of them at that time they were glad to get the jobs.  My brother now, most of the time he was out in Palestine and they had the sunshine all the time.  He was always talking about that, he loved it, he loved the air force.
MM:	Did he leave it at the end of the war?
JW:	He did, he did after he came back.  He got married to an Irish girl and had a family.  He’s still here.  
[Indecipherable for five minutes of tape]
MM:	Going back a bit to when you were still in school, what kind of education and training did you get in preparation for going to work?
JW:	None, we just learned our lessons.  The Irish was there and anything about work was never mentioned.  We were all leaving at fourteen at that time but you looked after yourself from that on.  We all left at fourteen.  You could go to Parnell Tech.
LC:	You could go to the Tech. That was over Parnell Street way and most of the people then went from that into the factories.  A lot of them went into the factories because they had to pay at that time.
JW:	There’d be very few going because you had to pay and they wouldn’t have it, you know.
MM:	A few of the women who’ve spoken to me tell me that they had done well in school and wanted to go on to secondary school but the money wasn’t there.
LC:	That’s it.
MM:	But if the money was there maybe to send one, the boys would be sent, on the basis that the girls were bound to be getting married and wouldn’t need to work.
LC:	Only girls went on to secondary school that were well off.  Some got scholarships.
JW:	Well, that those that got scholarships could go on but now, my two sisters in law went to secondary.  They went on to secondary in Dominick Street, got their inter cert and everything, they did, and the two brothers, went on to Vincent’s School.  
MM:	Would they have gone into office or white collar work?
JW:	No, Michael went into [pause] he served his time as a fitter with C.I.E. and the other fellow went to serve his time as an electrician.  They went on.
MM:	And what did their sisters two following their secondary education?
JW:	Well, they went on to be nuns after.  But like, they had now [pause] one is a reverend mother now and the other girl died during the war.  She was in Scotland and she went out to [pause] she was always out helping people in air raids and all that and she got pneumonia and never reported it.  She remained out on duty, looking after the people that had been bombed, and then she went into a coma and she died.  Now the other girl now, she’s still now in France, in Rouen, she’s a reverend mother there.  But right, they had the education to pursue all that, you know?  I still have their Inter certs and all at home, even though that’s a long time ago.  Forty something.
MM:	Well, one woman [pause] in her family, the elder two girls had to go straight to work from primary school but the younger two went to secondary and got the education.  The older two contributed and made it possible for the younger two to go on in school and they got better jobs.
JW:	And easier jobs, you see.  When you left at fourteen you only got hard jobs, like hotel work and all the sewing and that type of jobs, you got.  You wouldn’t even get into some of the shops, the drapers or anywhere.  Otherwise you had to have the fees.  I remember I had a friend, May Winston, and she went into Pyms and I remember her mother giving £50 and it was a fortune in those days.  I’d another friend, Eugene Jones and the mother had to give £80 for him to get into Brown Thomas.  He was at the linen counter and the fee that time was £80.  It was a fortune in those days.  And to get into C.I.E. to serve your time, you had to have £10 for your tools.  My husband had to pay that, and that was in 1937 and £10 was a good bit of money at that time.  You had to have £10 to make sure you had all your tools for the trade.  I often remember the mother telling me that she had some kind of a policy with one of the insurance companies and she forfeited it to give him the money to get into the service.  He went in first and he was only on the engines, and he gave it up, he said this is not for me.  So he went into the fitting and he was a test fitter then in C.I.E. until he retired.  He used to test all those buses; the country buses, he would test them all.  [Pause]  It’s surprising the ups and downs you meet in life, but once you have your health you have everything.  Once you have your health, things fall into place.
[Indecipherable]
MM:	Would you have expected to have children soon after your marriage?
JW:	Oh yes, Joan was born [pause]
LC:	She never got a minute [laughs]
JW:	I was married in August and Joan was born in the following July and then I had [pause] well, three years after, I had Willy, I think, then Mary, then Pauline, then Linda.  And now they’re all gone, married, left me.  You know, they’re all out on their own now.  And as the time went by, you could see, like, times are much better now, they’ve got their own homes and as time went on, life got better for everybody.  Better jobs, Joan went into the service and Mary’s in the bank and Pauline is Health and Safety Officer in Beaumont and Willy was a printer.  So the jobs and all came, the jobs seemed to come better.  Everyone was better [pause] the jobs were better than what I had when I was young.
MM:	It seems as if we’re going backwards in that regard, though, that young people are back not being able to get their own homes.
JW:	It’s going back, nearly, to what we were.  Now, Joan is lucky to have her house here [pause]
MM:	We might have more money but many things are still out of reach.
JW:	That’s right, it’s very hard to get established, very hard.  Now Joan is here in Castleknock, and Linda married a farmer, she’s out in Ballyboughal.  He does Premier Milk, you know, but they’re all [pause] they all got on well, you know, because there’s a big difference from the way I was.  Like the country has come on wonderfully, really, you know, everybody has improved.  This generation – they’re marvellous, really.
MM:	One of the big differences that I’d be conscious of is that women in the 1940s accepted a very inferior position.
JW:	They did.
MM:	It was written into the Constitution but they laugh now at some of the things they accepted then, and think they were very naïve.
LC:	But that was life then.
JW:	And De Valera said he wanted a country of ‘comely maidens’, loads of children round the fire.
LC:	[Laughs]  When I said to that to Mary, what she said about De Valera wasn’t worth saying. [Laughs] Mary’s a big career woman.  You’d want to be a comely maiden with your children with you, round the fire [laughs].  
MM:	She’d probably have been quite sympathetic to the debate that went on about the 1937 Constitution when it was being written.  A lot of women’s groups objected to the provision that put women into the home as if that was their only position but they were ignored at the time.
JW:	Oh, that was your place there, at the cooker and the sink. [Laughs]  The Children’s Allowance came out, when the Children’s Allowance came out.  I don’t know what year it came out in and it was 2s.  I got – I didn’t get anything for Joan.  I got 2s for Willy, then I don’t know what I got [pause] it was 1s and 6d after that for the rest.  That’s all the Children’s Allowance was.  Joan got nothing, she wasn’t counted and Willy got 2s.  2s or a half a crown, that’s all it was.  Very little.
[Indecipherable]
JW:	Then you see the credit unions got started around that time, which brought people up out of the poverty trap.  They started to save in the credit union and they were able to borrow a few pound and pay it back at easy rates and things like that, you know?  When I got married, I remember I had £6 - Michael gave me his wages and I thought it was marvellous [laughs].  That was 1953 and I’ll always remember the browny kind of £5 note.  He’d put it on the table and it was £6 a week, I remember.
MM:	Did you discuss managing the money with your husband?
JW:	Not really.  He’d just put it on the table and say do your best with it.  And out of that, then, I’d have to pay the mother the rent.  I remember always giving her a £1, a green pound and a 10s note out of that, for the rent, because the loan had to be paid on the house.  And the rates had to be paid and ground rent and that was a help, like.  The mother and father were there.  I remember when I got married, I went in to live there, you see, and that was the way it was. 
MM:	How did you manage then with your mother in law, sharing the house?
JW:	We managed all right.  Her and I got on very well, very well.  We were happy there.  It wasn’t that everybody else had houses with washing machines and everything else and I hadn’t that but I managed.  I was happy and I’d five children and got on with it.  
MM:	Do you know the way your ration coupons were for particular shopkeepers, did you find that very difficult, that you couldn’t search around for bargains?
JW:	When she wanted tea my mother would go down to Moore Street and she’d go to the dealers.  She’d hide behind the corner in case there was [indecipherable] …
You could get everything on the black market, everything.
LC:	Outside your ration, anything you’d buy outside your ration.
MM:	Even though it was a very small allowance?
JW:	She’d still go down and get the tea.  Then she’d measure that bit of tea out.  
LC:	When I was in England during the war, I’d be saving up the tea and I used to bring her over the tea [laughs].
JW:	She used to bring it home because we’d no tea.  She used to have to go down to Moore Street and watch around the corner until everything was clear and the tea would be given.
LC:	And she’d write to me don’t forget the tea [laughs].  That’s when I’d be coming home, don’t forget the tea.
MM:	I thought mail was censored?
LC:	Oh it was, I know.  Sometimes I’d write to her and half the letter was gone.  It might have been something [pause] just something about the war.
JW:	Do you remember she sent, I always remember this, she sent you elastic for your knickers [laughs].
LC:	[Laughs] And it was opened and she was sent for.
JW:	Mammy was sent for to the Custom office or something.  I’ll always remember the Customs man and all.  She said don’t be ridiculous, it’s only a bit of elastic for the girl’s knickers [all laugh].  
LC:	There was such a commotion. [Laughs]  They wouldn’t open the parcel and she had to come down and open it and whatever.  They knew what was in it but she had to open it and declare it.  In front of all the men and she had to tell them what it was for – the girl’s knickers had no elastic [laughs].  There was no elastic over there and they could it here, you know.
MM:	I saw one document giving the different rations that were allowed for things, including women’s underwear, and there were different points for different kinds of corsets.  So if you were a very big woman and there were loads of bones in your corset, you were in real trouble with the points.  
JW:	And they wore the corsets at that time.
MM:	They did, yes, but they went into incredible detail about how things were rationed.  
LC:	They had to be like that.  The letters would be opened, and parcels, like that.  I’ll always remember the elastic, the way she was sent for and she was saying, what do they want me for, you know?  And like, she had to go down to some office and declare it because they wanted to know what was in the parcel.
MM:	I’m sure it was very worrying.
JW:	Yes, at that time and that’s all it way, the elastic.  And is that all you brought me down for, she said [laughs] a bit of elastic for my daughter’s knickers [laughs].
[Indecipherable]
MM:	And do you remember the turf stacks in the Phoenix Park?
JW:	Oh yes.
MM:	And did you have to go up there to collect it or was there some arrangement for delivery?
JW:	I don’t know now, I think it came around with a man on a cart.  It was always soaking, most people couldn’t use it, it would be so smoky.
MM:	I believe it was flea ridden as well.
LC:	Oh yes.  I remember a man, he worked in C.I.E. and whatever part of it he was in he’d pick up the bits of coal from the trains, and I remember he was using the lining of his coat, to put bits of coal down the lining of the coat and he’d be walking from side to side with the coal. 
JW:	He’d be bringing home the coal from the railway for a bit of fire.  That’s the only way he could get a bit of coal and everybody used to see him coming.
MM:	They’d all know?
LC:	Oh yes [laughs].
JW:	It was the way that people would manage, you’d have to provide.
MM:	And did you use the straw box for cooking?
JW:	No, we didn’t use it but people did, people used them.  They used to be smoking out in the gardens; they were terrible.  It was nearly like [pause] they’d try to cook on that and the gardens would smell like I don’t know what, outside, from the burning of the straw.  I think they used to let us use the gas on Sunday.  I always remember the smell of the roast on Sunday, a bit of roast beef.  I think they used to allow a certain amount of gas extra on Sunday.  Even though we weren’t at war, we might as well have been.
LC:	Sure we’d have been better off at war.
JW:	You see, nothing was coming in, the boats and that.  I think most of our foodstuff was going to England.  Things were so scarce.
MM:	Well, I must say I’ve never understood why some things, like butter, for instance, were rationed, when they were produced here.  I know a woman, who was working in the Ministry of Supplies, and mainly she was dealing with shopkeepers and people who were licensed to sell rationed goods, but she said they had to be very strict about keeping people within the limits.
JW:	Oh yes, that’s right.  The shops and all were terrified to give anything extra, you know.
MM:	I’ve gone through a lot of the documents where they set out the various rations and I can see why petrol would have been rationed.
JW:	Yes, that was rationed too.  There was a lot of other stuff, like nylon stockings, now, there was nothing like that until the war ended.  And fruit, that was very scarce.  Then they started to come in, you know - because the boats weren’t coming in during the war.
MM:	 One woman told me a story of how her mother had dried fruit to make a Christmas pudding, and she’d left the mixture to stand overnight.  But the children were picking out the raisins and stirring it to hide what they took.  Then when it was boiled she just said that she thought she had put much more fruit in it – they’d all eaten nearly all the dried fruit out of it.
LC:	Oh yes, of course.
MM:	It stuck in her mind because it was so difficult to get fruit.
JW:	You would remember that, of course, it would stick in your mind.  I’ve never forgotten the smell of the oranges.  And now, I often have orange juice in the morning and I’d squeeze a fresh orange every morning and that scene comes back to me all the time. [Indecipherable] 
JW:	You’d never not do what your mother would tell you, never.  And your mother would only have to look at you.  My mother would only have to look and you’d know you were doing wrong.
MM:	Your mother was obviously a very strong person, standing in for your father as well when he was away.  Would that have been true of other families as well?
JW:	Well, most of them, yes.  The mothers kind of [pause] they were at home but they kept things going.  [Pause]  You had to be in early and you had to say where you were [pause] although when mine were growing up they had to do it too and that’s not that long ago.  Michael, their father, would watch everything.  Watch the clock, watch everything, he wanted them to do their best in everything.  He was like that, very much so, yes.  I used to think he was a bit hard and I remember my sister in law used to say to me, well they have to be afraid of one of you.  He’d come in at five o’clock and he’d look where they were, and if they weren’t there, he’d go out around the square looking for them, especially in the night was dark.  He wouldn’t even take a cup of tea, he’d go round and see where they were.  They’d be in then after that.  We’d a little park in the square, you know, and they’d say now, they remember the night when they were climbing on the railings and someone would say, quick, there’s your daddy, quick [laughs].  And you know, he caught them climbing over the gate of the park and there was murder over it, they weren’t to do that.  I think today with the kids, they’re not corrected enough, I do.  They’re not corrected enough, the children; they’re very spoiled.
LC:	They’re let run wild.  
JW:	I remember he used to say them, when they’d be doing their exercises, and he’d say don’t be bothering about these languages, he’d say, you must concentrate on maths, Irish and English and after that, it’s pounds, shillings and pence. [All laugh]  that was philosophy.
MM:	And do you think that the mother plays an important part in the children’s education?
LC:	I do, yes, because the mother watches them all the time, she’s there all the time with them.  It’s the mothers they run to when there’s anything wrong with them, if they’re in trouble and all that, and they’re afraid of the fathers.  I always imagine the father seems very strict to them, they’d rather have the mother.  The mothers are softer.
[Indecipherable]
JW:	Because the fathers are gone more.
MM:	I suppose that could make them seem a bit remote.
JW:	Yes, yes.  I don’t think being strict did them any harm, they’ve never done anything wrong, you know?  They studied and they did well and they’re out on their own now.  You’re always afraid of boys getting into rows, you know, but lately it has gone very vicious, with the rows.
LC:	The young people are gone very rough; I think the drink goes to their heads.  That’s the trouble with boys, they don’t know their own strength and if they start fighting, it’s very hard [pause]
JW:	And they’re able to get the drink, even if they’re young.  Even teenagers, they’re able to get the drink.  Like, they’re not supposed to be served but they get it.  I think the trouble is they can get those cans very easily and they don’t know what they’re dealing with.  I think those cans are too easily got and know one knows what they are and [pause] they react to them.
LC:	Sure, they’re just water.
JW:	No, they’re not, divil the water.  
MM:	Do you think that Ireland has changed a lot in the sixty years since the war?
JW:	Oh yes, an awful lot.
MM:	Would there be any single thing that stands out for you in that time that might have caused those changes?
JW:	Like for the good of the country do you mean?
MM:	Well, for good or bad.
JW:	Well, I think there’s too much freedom to drink and I do think those cans are dangerous because children can get them and it’s so easily got, no one can watch them.  I think that was an awful mistake, letting children have access to drink.
LC:	Our generation didn’t have a drink.  
JW:	You’d lie down dead if your parents thought you were having a drink.  I think too what really was a sad thing was the dance halls going.  I do think that.
LC:	Yes, the dance halls were lovely.
JW:	Where are the young people to go to now?
LC:	They’ve nowhere to go, only the pub.
JW:	That’s the only entertainment now, the pub.  And I think the dance halls were lovely, you know?  It was a lovely night’s entertainment.  It’s a pity, but when the dance bands went [pause] but even then, there were still bands [pause] the Arcadia in Bray, the Balalaika, all these.  And there was never any trouble, no rows or anything.  And there was the Mansion House, the ceilidh on the Saturday night.
MM:	That’s a restaurant now where the Round Room used to be.
JW:	Oh dear, I never knew that.  
[Joan enters with tea and interview ends.]




Letty and Josie Interview, 2nd December 2002




L&J1


