Maureen, Castlewellan.  Interview: 6 August 1999.  

MM:  Could you give me just some details about yourself, where and when you were born and what sort of family you were born into?
MR:	Well, I was born in Belfast.  You want when - 1930. So I’m 69 and I was born into[pause] my father was a master slater, a roofer.  My mother didn’t work.  She was originally a handkerchief stitcher but she didn’t when I was born.  
MM:	Where in the family were you?
MR:	I was the oldest of eight, I have four sisters and three brothers.
MM:	Okay, well, you’re[pause]was your father always in work?
MR:	He was mostly in work.  Now, during the war there wasn’t a lot of roofing going on so he did work building air raid shelters and eh, he did go to London to work for a time, during the war.  He actually was in London when the doodlebugs were coming over [laughs] I remember that, you know.
MM:	And in terms of your own education, when did you start school and what kind of school was it?
MR:	Oh, I went to [pause]well, I suppose you would call it primary school, I can’t remember now.  I started school around five, I think, and left when I was fourteen.  Then I went into a job as a stitcher, making ladies underwear.
MM:	Was that in a local factory?
MR:	It was, yes, in a local factory.
MM:	And how did you get into that?  Did somebody introduce you?
MR:	Yes, a friend of ours brought me in as a trainee.
MM:	And would that have been the usual thing for girls who went into the factory?
MR:	Yes, mostly girls went into the mills or the stitching factories.
MM:	Before your mother got married was she working in one of the factories or had she done something else?
MR:	My mother worked in a handkerchief factory; they made handkerchiefs.  She was doing the same sort of stuff, yes.
MM:	So you were fifteen and you presumably did do a full day’s work.  
MR:	Oh yes.
MM:	What were your hours?
MR:	Nine till five.  
MM:	Were there many people from the area who were going into the factory?  
MR:	Almost all of my friends were in the factories, as stitchers.
MM:	What sort of training did you get?
MR:	We were taught to use the machines.  The factory I worked in was as I said, making underwear, ladies underwear.  We were taught to use the plain stitch machine; we were also taught to use the overlocking machine, the buttonholing machine and buttoning machine.
MM:	When you were in and you were trained, were there different rates of pay for before you were trained?
MR:	Oh yes, we were trainees.
MM:	How long did that last?
MR:	I think about a year, and then we were put on to whatever product was being produced.
MM:	The rates of pay for trainees – was there much of a difference when you were fully trained?
MR:	Well, actually, when you were a stitcher, a qualified stitcher, you were paid according to the work you’d done.  You got so much per dozen.
MM:	Piece work?
MR:	Yes, piece work.
MM:	Were there male employees in the factory?
MR:	There were, but not on the machines.  They were mechanics and cutters, cutting out the garments, they were men, and the managers were all men.  But the stitchers were all women.
MM:	Was there ever a possibility that a woman could become a cutter?  
MR:	No, they were all men.
MM:	Did the women resent that?
MR:	I don’t think so.  I think it was just accepted.  It was just accepted that the men did the cutting and the women did the sewing. [laughs]
MM:	So would cutting have been considered more skilled than sewing.
MR:	Oh yes.
MM:	So they would presumably have been paid more. 
MR:	Oh yes, they were.
MM:	Would you have any idea of the difference in the rates?
MR:	I wouldn’t have any idea what the men were paid but it was always more than the women.
MM:	I’ve come across some industries where the difference was as much as half again what the women were paid.
MR:	Oh yes, it would be.
MM:	Were there any benefits in addition to the basic pay?  For instance, was there a pension scheme?
MR:	Well, we paid our national insurance which was the sick pay scheme but there was no pension scheme.
MM:	In the workforce, would there have been women with children?
MR:	There were married women, but not very many.  They were mostly single women.  
MM:	Was that a management policy, to hire single women?
MR:	No, I think they chose to leave when they got married.  I don’t think they were encouraged to leave.
MM:	Did you become active as a union representative in the factory?
MR:	No, I got married and then I didn’t work for quite a while.  Then I went into the Royal Victoria Hospital to work and it was then I got interested in the trade union.
MM:	Back in the factory, was there an active union?
MR:	I don’t think so.  I don’t remember but I don’t think so.
MM:	You don’t remember ever being asked to join a union at that time?
MR:	No, no.
MM:	How long did you stay there in the factory?
MR:	I was a stitcher for seven years.
MM:	And then you left to have children?
MR:	Yes, yes.
MM:	You made a conscious decision to give up work?
MR:	When my children were coming.  Well I did work for about two years after I got married and then the children were born.
MM:	Was there an option for you to continue work?  Did the factory provide childcare?
MR:	 Oh no, there was nothing like that.
MM:	Who did look after children for women who were unable to give up working?
MR:	I think in those days, mostly grandmothers looked after the children.  I don’t remember ever hearing about childminders or that, you know.  Mostly family looked after children.
MM:	I know there was a push during the war to provide nurseries.
MR:	Probably, I would think in the munitions factories during the war, they had government childcare provided so the women would go into them, the factories, you know to do the war work.  But other than that, I don’t remember.
MM:	When you started off, did you have to walk to work or …?
MR:	Oh yes, you had to walk to work [laughs].
MM:	Was it near or did you have far to go?
MR?	Actually, when I worked in my first job, we went on the bus.
MM:	Did you get many breaks during the day?
MR:	Just lunchbreak, I think.  Half an hour for lunch.
MM:	Were you able to get home for lunch?
MR:	No, we just brought a sandwich.
MM:	Was your mother still at home?
MR:	She was, yes.
MM:	And you were the first out to work of your family?
MR:	I was the first yes.  
MM:	When you started work, did you have control of your pay packet?
MR:	Oh I handed it over to my mother.  Unopened! [laughs]
MM:	And did your mother give you back anything?
MR:	Yes, I think she gave me a shilling. [laughs]
MM:	So you were mother was still the one who decided what would happen with the money.
And your father was working at this time?
MR:	He was working, yes.  He gave up his pay packet unopened too.
MM:	When you were finishing school would you have liked not to have to go straight to work?  Would you have liked to go to secondary school?
MR:	Well, actually I would have loved to have gone but I was the eldest of eight so I had to go out to work.
MM:	Of the eight, was there was any difference made in terms of boys and girls, whether they went on to work?
MR:	No, the boys were put into trades.  Tom, the one that came next to me[pause]I was first then there were three boys then the four girls.  Tom, the oldest boy, he became a roofer like my dad.  Then the next one he became a heating engineer and the third one became a roofer as well.  The girls all went into factories.
MM:	Did they stay there until they got married?
MR:	They did, yes.  
MM:	When you say you would have like to on to school …
MR:	I would have loved to have gone on.
MM:	This would have been, what [pause]about 1944?
MR:	1945.  No 1944.  I left school at fourteen.
MM:	Was it a while then before you went into the factory?
MR:	No, no.  I went in the next week [laughs].  Finished school then went straight into work, yes.  I actually did an examination, which was called the elementary examination back then, I was thirteen, thirteen and a half and I got honours in it and I would have loved to have gone on to school but there wasn’t any choice.  The money was needed.
MM:	What about later?  When the eight were taken care of, was there any opportunity for you to maybe go back to school at night?
MR:	No.  Well I never thought [pause]I got married then I was bringing up my family but I did a lot of summer schools and things with the trade union and I went to art class at night.  You can see some of my work here [laughs].  And I did do some classes.  Even now, I’d love to do languages, you know.  My son lives in Germany and when I’m over there I want to learn German  [laughs].
MM:	I tried but the grammar was beyond me [laughs].
MR:	Yes, I know.
MM:	Would any of your girlfriends at school would they have been in the factory with you.  And did any of them consider not going out to work?
MR:	No, everybody went out to work.
MM:	So, the area of Belfast where you were living, would it have been in the morning, all the doors opening and everybody going out to work.  And there were linen mills in the area?
MR:	Yes, my house was actually quite near the linen mill.
MM:	How would the work in the factory compare to the linen mill?  Would it have been much harder in the mill?
MR:	Well, I have always been told that it was much harder to work in the mill so luckily yes, I’ve never had the experience.  But people say that it was quite hard to work in the mill.  
MM:	I’ve spoken to two women who worked in the mill and they say it depended on where you were put.
MR:	Yes, which department.
MM:	Would that have been the case in the sewing factory, that some areas would be harder than others?
MR:	No, not really, no.  I don’t think so.  It was all stitching.  There was the cutting, of course, but the men did that.  There was the stitching and then there was examining.  There was a squad of people who examined the work when you had finished it.  And there was the ironing and the packing.
MM:	They were all quite skilled?
MR:	They were, yes.  There wasn’t any nasty jobs really.
MM:	Would you know if they were regulated by trade board, or anything?
MR:	I wouldn’t really, no.
MM:	So you said the bosses were male.  What sort of numbers are you talking about?  Was it a big factory?
MR:	The first factory I went into, yes, it was a big factory.  Now we had maybe the ones were over you, in the team, were women but the managers, all the managers were men.
MM:	When you say the team, would there be maybe, what, ten or eleven workers and a supervisor?
MR:	There would be a row of sewing machines, and then you know, one row[pause]I actually worked in a shirt factory after I worked in the underwear factory and em, there would a row doing collars and there would be someone over that row.  There would be another row doing front and another row doing backs and another row doing sleeves.  You know, so there were supervisors over each piece of the garment that was being made.
MM:	If a woman went in as a sewer and she was put on sleeves, would that be where she would stay so long as she was working in the factory?
MR:	Yes, if you were on sleeves, that’s where you were.  Maybe, you know, if you asked, you could go on to fronts or collars, but it was all the same work, really.
MM:	So who put the whole garment together, was that another job?  Was it at the same level?
MR:	Yes, that was still the same level.
MM:	And would you remember if any woman ever applied for a managerial position?
MR:	No, I wouldn’t if any woman ever applied.  I think then, you know, it was just accepted that the men were managers and the women were the workers. [laughs]
MM:	Would you know where the men came from who were managers?  Would they have worked their way up through the factory or were they hired in from outside?
MR:	I think they probably were employed from outside.  Now I have a brother in law, he was a sewing machine mechanic.  Actually a sewing machine mechanic in a factory that I worked in making ladies underwear, and he worked his way from being a sewing machine he went to classes to learn to make garments and then he became a manager.
MM:	So it was possible to do it?
MR:	It was possible to do it, yes, but not for women.  [laughs]
MM:	When you went back to work after having your children, in the hospital, what work did you then?
MR:	Catering.
MM:	And did you get the job because of your experience in the home?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	Were you otherwise qualified?
MR:	No, no.  I knew how to do it because I had cooked at home.
MM:	And how did you come to be involved in the trade union?
MR:	Well, I was always very involved in people getting their rights, even though they weren’t in a trade union and then I was asked to become a shop steward and [pause] I was very shy [laughs].  I really was and but then I said I will, I will do it so I became a shop steward.
MM:	Was there a family background of trade union activity?
MR:	Funny enough, there wasn’t, but my brother in America, he became a trade unionist and his two sons are both trade unionists.
MM:	But you’re not aware of any history?
MR:	No.
MM:	Of your family, did many of them emigrate, go to America?
MR:	My brother and sister.
MM:	Would that have been straight out of school?
MR:	No, no.
MM:	What about the others, what did they do?
MR:	Well, they’re all in Northern Ireland.  I’ve one son who is in Germany but his brothers and sisters are all here.
MM:	Just going back, in the[pause]when you were going out to work in the sewing factory, would that have been the total range of occupation available, the factory or the linen mill?
MR:	Some of the men went to England but they went as construction workers.  A lot of women worked in the hospitals as domestics.  I actually knew women who worked in the hospitals and in those days, they actually had to get down on their knees and scrub the corridors.  The women, who lived in my street, you know, my friends’ mothers worked in hospitals as domestics.
MM:	Was there a good neighbourhood network in your street?  Would people help each other?
MR:	Oh yes, people were very good.
MM:	It seems to be that working class areas were better at looking after each other.
MR:	Yes, that’s right.  They were very good at looking after each other.
MM:	If maybe there wasn’t a grandmother to look after children, would neighbours do that?
MR:	Oh yes, and you know there was always a woman in most streets and if anyone was sick you went for her.  [Laughs] Childbirth and everything.  Mrs. Craig it was in our in our street and when you were sick everyone went for Mrs. Craig.
MM:	Was that because Mrs. Craig had some training or was she just trusted?
MR:	No, she wasn’t trained, but childbirth [pause] if anyone died, you know, everyone went for her.  
MM:	Was she an older woman?
MR:	Yes, she was slightly older, but not much.
MM:	Have you any idea how she came to be in that position?
MR:	No.  Actually, she was a girl I went to school with it[pause]her mother.  She was very good.
MM:	Would she have come in[pause]would women have given birth at home?
MR:	Oh yes, we were all born at home.  Yes.
MM:	And what would have been the procedure?  Would a doctor come in or just Mrs. Craig?
MR:	Or a midwife.  My mother always had a nurse came in.  If there was complications, probably a doctor would be called but usually the nurse would come in when you called her.
MM:	Did your father help out with the birth?
MR:	Oh no.  He just stayed downstairs.  [laughs]
MM:	Can you remember when you were growing up, did your father get involved in the housework?
MR:	I can remember on a Sunday morning, he always made breakfast on a Sunday morning.  And he did cook but I don’t remember him ever cleaning.
MM:	Like my father. (Both laugh).  How big a gap is there between you and the others?  You’re the oldest, were they close together in age?
MR:	Yes.  There was only a year and a half between most of us.
MM:	So when you were fourteen, going out to work, and you had a twelve and a half year old brother, would he have been asked to do the housework the way you were?
MR:	Oh no.  
MM:	And when you were handing up your whole pay packet were you still expected to do domestic chores?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	And did the boys help at all?
MR:	No, boys didn’t help round the house, just the girls.
MM:	Did you ever question that?
MR:	No, we never questioned it really.  We didn’t.
MM:	One of my sisters[pause]it’s like your family, there is less than a two year gap between us, and she has a twin brother.  He was never asked to do anything but we bitterly resented it.  We couldn’t see what the difference between him and us was. [laughs].  In an earlier generation, you obviously didn’t think twice about it.  What sort of work would you have had to do in helping your mother?
MR:	Oh, washing dishes, tidying our room.  Remember we only had two bedrooms and eight children and mother and father.  It was quite squashed.
MM:	How did your mother manage – presumably she didn’t have a washing machine?
MR:	Actually my mother did have the first washing machine in the street. [laughs]
MM:	Was that one of the twin tubs?
MR:	No, it was a weird object.  It had a handle which revolved around the top and then it revolved round again. [laughs]  But she did hand wash and she had one of those[pause]Daddy was very good at doing things, carpentry work and that round the house, and she had a pulley line in the yard and she had a pulley line in the kitchen.  She used to wash the clothes and hang them up on this pulley line.
MM:	And you were in one of the terraced houses?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	I live in one of those now.  Of course, it’s been considerably modernised.  The bathroom in my house is an addition – did you have a bathroom?
MR:	No, we didn’t have a bathroom.
MM:	So did you have a shared toilet?
MR:	Yes, a shared toilet.
MM:	And was that backing on to a laneway?
MR:	No, it was backing onto a hauliers’ yard.  We didn’t have a laneway at the back.
MM:	You see a lot of photographs at the time with women out scrubbing their front doorsteps.
MR:	Yes.
MM:	Would your mother have been doing this?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	I suppose when people were doing that kind of work, they were seeing each other and could have a chat, seeing what was going on.
MR:	We had white, like cream coloured stone tiles on the floor and we had em, a black grate with a silvery coloured edging on it and that had to be black leaded and polished with brasso to make it shine.
MM:	And the heating was from a coal fire?
MR:	Yes, a coal fire.
MM:	And did you have a coalman coming around?
MR:	Yes.  We had a coal fire; well we called it the kitchen then and then in the living room and a coal fire upstairs.  That was always a luxury in the winter, light the fire upstairs and go up and sit and read. [laughs]  It was nice.
MM:	And in terms of just enjoying yourself when you came out of school and you were at work, would you have done things with your family or your friends?
MR:	With my friends.  On Sunday, Daddy and Mummy used to bring us to the park to have a picnic, or you know, when you think of children now and they’re brought everywhere by car.  Where we lived was on the Falls Road and we had a walk to the Falls Park which was quite a bit.  But we didn’t think of it in those days, it was terribly far, it must have been at least two miles and back again.  And even you know, when we were older and working, we used to work to Falls Park and play camogie and then walk back again and go to the ceilidh that night. [laughs]  Thought nothing of it. 
MM:	So when you were working you got off at five o’clock and you went straight home.  Would you have had to help out preparing the evening meal or …
MR:	No, my mother used to have that ready.
MM:	So would you go out during the week?
MR:	No, just at the weekend, or during summer nights we went to the Falls Park and played camogie.
MM:	Was that for all the girls in the neighbourhood?
MR:	Yes, all the girls in the neighbourhood.  
MM:	And what about dancing or cinema?
MR:	Yes, we would go to the cinema and as I say, we’d go to the ceilidh.
MM:	Did your entertainment have to come out of the money your mother had given back to you from your pay?  Say if you were going out on Saturday and you wanted to go out on Sunday, would she give you extra money to pay for it?
MR:	Well, according to how much money there was available. You know, if there wasn’t, well you just didn’t go.
MM:	Who made the decisions about how money was spent in the family?
MR:	Mum.
MM:	Your father just handed in his pay packet unopened as well?
MR:	He did, yes.  
MM:	And would you remember if most of your friends and their fathers did that as well?
MR:	Yes.  Though my dad was pretty lucky about having work.  A lot of my friends’ fathers in the thirties, you know they didn’t have any work.
MM:	How did they manage?
MR:	Well, they must have got dole or something.
MM:	It was very low at that time.
MR:	It was very low, yes, it was very low.
MM:	Say a father was out of work, would the neighbours help out?
MR:	Well, I think that most of the mothers got jobs in the hospital or the mill and I presume the fathers looked after the children.  Probably that’s what happened, you know.  You don’t think of it really, when you’re young.  You take it for granted.
MM:	If the neighbourhood had a lot of the same kind of problems, would there have been things that you did, round about the time of elections or anything, would you remember for instance whether there were politicians coming around and trying to make any difference in the area?
MR:	I don’t really remember.  I remember my mother speaking about Joe Devlin, he was a politician and he used to run bus runs for under privileged children to places like Bangor and that.
MM:	This didn’t really make a difference to you?
MR:	No.  
MM:	Do you remember when you first got your vote, would you have thought about how you were going to use it or would there have been expectations about your using it for the first time?
MR:	I think in the North of Ireland people, unfortunately, vote according to their religion.  You know …
MM:	You would have voted for nationalist politicians?
MR:	Probably, probably.  We don’t even have a labour party in the north here [laughs].
MM:	Harry Midgely was quite active during the war.  He was quite a good labour politician and he seems to have been less sectarian than most but he didn’t get the Catholic vote [laughs]
MR:	No, he didn’t get a vote round here.  I think even today, it’s the same.  You know, people vote according to their religion.
MM:	Perhaps that’s why things don’t change?
MR:	Exactly, yes.
MM:	In the trade union movement, was there still a religious divide?
MR:	No, I think the trade unions have cut across the religious divide, because I know Protestants and Catholics in the trade union movement who are very broadminded and I think they try not to make a difference between different people.  I think they have tried to make a difference in the whole set-up, yes definitely.
MM:	Going back to the war years, did it strike you that something significant was going on around you?
MR:	No.  You mean?
MM:	Well, did you feel that something important was happening?
MR:	Politically, or the war?
MM:	Well, just generally.  Northern Ireland was in the war and the South wasn’t seriously involved.  Did you realise[pause]?
MR:	That that was happening?  Oh yes.  
MM:	In what way would it have affected you?
MR:	Well, em, I remember standing at the back window of the back bedroom and watching a dog fight in the sky and dropping[pause]they dropped flares; we didn’t know what they were then – they were like red and then they came down and they burst open like fireworks which lit up the place so they could see where to drop the bombs.  I remember standing at the back bedroom window watching.
MM:	And were you evacuated?
MR:	And then I was evacuated.  At Easter, Easter Tuesday I think it was, or Easter Monday, there was a very bad bombing in Belfast and my dad went out and had a look round and came back and said, get packed, youse are going to the country.  But Mum and Dad had already arranged with people we always went on holiday to, in Cushendun, that if necessary we could go to them, so Dad packed us all off to the country. [laughs]
MM:	I’ve read accounts of people going from, particularly the dock areas which was very badly hit, up into the hills and nobody was worrying about what area they came from.
MR:	Exactly.  We were packed off to the country and we never did that, but I did know people who did every night, went off up into the mountains and slept in tents and things and then came back into the city in the morning.  But we went to Cushendun and we stayed there for over a year.
MM:	Was that very difficult?
MR:	It was.  We went to school and all there.
MM:	And were you staying with friends or relatives?
MR:	Well, my mother came with us and she stayed with us.  We had a house there.  Well, it wasn’t our house but it was people we knew so I think the government must have paid for us to be [pause] I didn’t think of it at the time but I presume that’s what must have happened.  I mean the government paid the people who owned the house so that we could stay there.
MM:	And would any of your friends have had that experience?
MR:	Some of them went off to different places.  But em, but a lot of them stayed in the city and as you say, went off to the mountains every night.
MM:	One woman was telling me she lived on the Falls Road and they went up in to the mountains at night and every morning she had to walk to work after coming down.  She didn’t want to do that but her father insisted.
MR:	That’s right.  We used to go in under the stairs when the raids were on.
MM:	When that was all over and you went in to work, was there ever any discussion of the IRA getting active in the South again or of the role they’d played in the war?
MR:	Not in work, no.  
MM:	Was there a religious divide in work, as well as the gender divide?  For instance, who would have owned the factory?
MR:	I think they were mostly Protestants.
MM:	Would that have been true of management as well?
MR:	Yes, but I worked with Protestants and Catholics.  We were all in the same boat.  
MM:	And that was true of the hospital as well?
MR:	Yes.  In the hospital a lot of the domestic jobs were done by Catholics and the porters were mostly Catholics from the Falls Road.
MM:	Would that have been because of the network, when the job became available you would tell your neighbour and they’d go for it?
MR:	Yes.  Not now, but then.  You know, people would get their sister or their neighbour a job if there was a vacancy.
MM:	So when you were going to school, would you have been aware of what you were going to do or would you have thought about it?
MR:	I wouldn’t have thought about it.
MM:	In the factories, with the sewing, was there any creative outlet?  You had to do it exactly according to the pattern?  So did you find that frustrating for an intelligent person to have absolutely no variation in what you were doing?
MR:	It can be, it can be.  Then again, you would have different kinds of garments to make, especially if you were making a whole garment.  You’d have different kinds and there was a great camaraderie among all the girls, you know, they would sing as they worked?  So it was all right, you know?
MM:	It wasn’t really like an assembly line, then?
MR:	No, it wasn’t like an assembly line.
MM:	You didn’t know exactly what you were going to do for every minute of every day.
MR:	No, it wasn’t like that at all.
MM:	So obviously then, if you were chatting or anything it wasn’t strictly forbidden.  There were a lot of factories where staff weren’t allowed to talk during working hours.
MR:	No, we had time to chat and we would sing a lot of the time. [laughs]
MM:	And were they songs about the work or the latest pop songs?
MR:	Just whatever the pop songs were.
MM:	Were there particular rules about working?  Say if you were late, were their punishments or fines?
MR:	You were fined if you were late.  I can’t remember how much.
MM:	And were they strict about that?
MR:	No, it wasn’t very strict really.  It was quite[pause]I quite enjoyed being a stitcher.  It did teach you to make your own clothes.  And all my sisters and myself, we all made our own clothes, we all made our own wedding dresses.  And so we did learn something. [laughs]
MM:	Your domestic experience when you were going to work later, the cooking and everything was useful but the early working experience was useful in your domestic life.
MR:	Oh yes, yes. 
MM:	Can you remember[pause]material and things like that were rationed during the war, and that still applied for quite a few years after.
MR:	Yes, quite a long time afterwards.
MM:	So if you wanted to make a dress, what did you do about that?
MR:	Well, when I made my wedding dress, I wanted lace and I went to the South of Ireland and smuggled it up.  (Both laugh).
MM:	I heard a lovely story about a lady who smuggled butter from the South and the train was stopped and it was so warm that the butter started to melt.  She had also bought a coat and she had two coats on so when the train stopped the butter was sliding down her.  (Both laugh)  So nobody thought twice about going down?
MR:	No, it was a regular thing.  [laughs]  It was a regular thing to go to the South and then smuggle things.  But that’s where I got the lace for my wedding dress, in Dublin.
MM:	Can you remember were you stopped or was it fairly lax?
MR:	It was fairly easy.  They came on and sort of looked around and just got off again.  Probably they knew perfectly well that people were smuggling things but [pause]
MM:	What about, you know, getting fruit to make your wedding cake, that sort of thing?  Was that difficult?
MR:	It probably was but my uncle worked in Kennedys Bakery and he got my wedding cake made for me. [laughs]
MM:	Would women normally have made their own cakes?
MR:	Yes.  But then I think people did bake, and sew and knit; more so than now.  Well, I made all my children’s clothes, their trousers, their jackets, their hats.  Everything they wore.  I had five sons and then I had a daughter and I made all her dresses and uniforms.
MM:	How old were your children when you went back to work?
MR:	Martina was about nine, she’s the youngest. 
MM:	So they still needed a fair amount of attention.  And were you still doing all the sewing and making clothes?
MR:	Yes.  
MM:	And how long were you working?  Was it a full time job?
MR:	Well, I only worked for a while and then I stopped working when they were off on school holidays and then I went in full time.  
MM:	Going back to when you were growing up, would your mother have shown you what she was doing when she cooking and sewing?
MR:	Oh yes.
MM:	And would you have done the same with your daughters?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	Was there any kind of similar thing for your brothers, that your father was showing them?
MR:	Yes.  They would have been shown[pause]Daddy was good with woodwork and he would show them how to do different things.
MM:	Your brother who became a roofer – did he do an apprenticeship with your father?
MR:	He did.  And my other brother - he lives in America now, he’s just retired.
MM:	Did he do that work in America?
MR:	No.  He worked for UPS for thirty two years, in America.
MM:	How old was he when he went?
MR:	He was twenty six.  He was a driver here, and em, after he[pause]I think he was employed as a driver to drive some Americans round and em, he must have talked to them and thought it would be better.  Like he was married with one child at the time and he went off on his own and then his wife and his little boy went about six months later.
MM:	Would many of your schoolfriends have emigrated?
MR:	Most of them stayed, most of them stayed.  A few emigrated but most of them stayed.
I would have liked to have gone to America but my husband wouldn’t go. [laughs]  He was a bit of a home bird.
MM:	I’d love to go off for a few years myself, it broadens the horizons.
MR:	It does, it does indeed, especially if you go from the North of Ireland.  I think it broadens your outlook.
MM:	Obviously the experience of living through the Troubles would underline that feeling, but would you have felt that back in the 1940s, that you were very confined in one place?
MR:	Oh yes, yes.
MM:	What about going outside the area – people I know in the Falls and Shankill and different areas would have felt that you just didn’t go outside your own area?
MR:	No, that’s true.
MM:	Was it a case that you were told not to or that you weren’t interested?
MR:	You weren’t interested really because you[pause]our activity you know would be going to gaelic matches, or playing camogie or going to ceilidhs.  You know, we were very into Irish culture on the Falls Road.  So you didn’t think of going anywhere else.  There was always a lot of things going on.
MM:	Did that ever change?
MR:	I think it did for a while, you know, but em, there’s a lot now back to the same routine again.  They don’t go out of their own areas, for obvious reasons. [laughs]  I think so, yes.
MM:	When you’re saying that you were always interested in getting their rights, was that based on anything in particular, because you’d read something or[pause]?
MR:	No, it was just always that feeling that people should be treated better.  They should be given rights as human beings and not be treated like “you do this, and you do that” you know.  They should be treated with a bit more respect.
MM:	Would you have seen people being treated in that way in work?
MR:	Sometimes, yes.  
MM:	Do you think that was a policy or was it just some individuals who were responsible?
MR:	I think it was a policy, yes, and I didn’t think that was right.  I thought that people should be treated with respect.
MM:	Having become a shop steward and taken a stand against that policy, how long was it before you became very active in the wider sphere of the union?  How did that develop?
MR:	Well, I was shop steward for three different units in the Royal in the catering department, the children’s, maternity, and geriatric unit and if anyone had a problem with the management, there was a really terrible manager  [pause] in fact the saying goes that I had the worst manager in the whole of the Royal.  They would ring me up and say, you know she’s doing whatever and I would go over and see her and see if I could get it sorted out for her.
MM:	And generally, did that approach work?
MR:	Usually, em, if it was a bit more serious than I could deal with, I would get in touch with the branch secretary and he would come in.
MM:	And were you ever tempted to become a full time official?
MR:	No.  Not really.
MM:	Was that for any particular reason?
MR:	No, I just never thought of being a full time official.
MM:	I know in SIPTU we have a major problem now in that more half of the membership are women but there are very few women in top positions in the union.  Was that true[pause]you would have come out of NUPE[pause]would that have been true of NUPE, that the men were chiefs and the women were the indians?
MR:	No, Inez McCormack is the regional secretary and Patricia McKeon is her right hand woman [laughs] so they’ve always sort of led NUPE and then when they came into UNISON, they are still there leading.  A lot of the branch secretaries are men, still, a lot of the branch secretaries are men.
MM:	Even in areas where there are mainly women working?
MR:	Yes.  Now some of the branch officers – a lot of the branch officers would be women.
MM:	Did you find that it was mainly older women who were becoming involved – who had left their child-rearing days behind or were younger women active as well?
MR:	It was mostly older women but then it was good to see the young ones getting involved.  I always liked to see the young ones getting involved in the trade unions.
MM:	Given that there are so few young women who become involved, why do you think that is?
MR:	I don’t think they are interested until they get older and then they suddenly think well, things aren’t right here, so they get involved.  But I don’t know[pause]in the Royal now, which is the environment where I was involved, there was a lot of good trade union women, a lot of them.
MM:	Had they any characteristics in common, other than being active in the trade union?  Do you know why some women came forward and others didn’t?
MR:	Just stronger women I think and saw that people needed someone to speak for them.  Because people do need someone to speak for them.
MM:	Were you involved with the project that NUPE did on women’s health?  Where they asked women about their experiences?
MR:	Yes, I know a lot of the women who were involved – they did a book.  I know a lot of them.
MM:	Patricia McKeon came to the Irish Labour History Society and gave a lecture about how the book was done.  Would you agree that the whole cycle of women’s health, particularly the child rearing aspect, has a huge affect on their employment circumstances?
MR:	Oh yes.  
MM:	Back in the forties and fifties, and even the sixties and seventies, maternity leave was by no means available, em, would you have been aware of women who so desperately needed the money that they were going back to work almost straight away?
MR:	Yes, a lot of women did, but then I think it was just granny took over.  Families were closer, some of them were just six weeks and they were back to work.  Maybe some even less, but none that I knew.
MM:	If grannies took over, would the granny be leaving with them or were the children brought to the granny as a rule?
MR:	Well, when we were young you see, most grannies lived with you and aunties, you know, family.  They all lived in the same street so they all could look after each other’s children.
MM:	How did that come about?  Say you were getting married and you were looking for a house, was it that maybe some families died off that there were enough houses for people not to have to move away?
MR:	Actually, there was a family facing us and the granny lived[pause]now I’m talking about two rooms downstairs and two rooms upstairs.  They granny lived downstairs and her son and his wife and children lived upstairs.  So there was a lot of that of[pause]two families sharing a house.
MM:	It fascinates me how people managed to stay in the same area when it meant if there were a lot of children in a family, how did they all get homes?
MR:	I know.
MM:	Was it easy to[pause]did they have to buy or did they rent?
MR:	Oh no, they rented them.  They didn’t buy.  They couldn’t afford to buy.  No, our house was always rented.
MM:	Would that have meant extra pressure on the family income?
MR:	Probably but I wasn’t aware of it.
MM:	Did you stay in the area when you got married?
MR:	No.  We moved out.
MM:	Was that because you couldn’t get a house?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	In terms of the close-knit community that still seems to be there, if you moved out could you come back on the same terms?
MR:	Oh yes.  
MM:	You weren’t considered to be an outsider?
MR:	Oh no, no.  
MM:	A woman on the Falls told me that if there were times when a lot of people in a street were out of work that a big pot of stew would be made and would go around.  Do you remember that happening on your street?
MR:	No, I don’t.  My mother was an outsider, you see, she didn’t come from the Falls Road,  She came from Ballymakerrig, over the Newtownards Road direction.
MM:	But she was still a Belfast woman?
MR:	Oh she was still a Belfast woman but she wasn’t a Falls Road woman. [Both laugh]  And she was very reserved, she didn’t mix a lot with the other women in the street.  
MM:	Was that she because she felt she was an outsider or just her character?
MR:	Just her character.  She was very reserved – she was that type of person.
MM:	Would that have passed on to the children?
MR:	Yes, I can see it in my sisters and myself.
MM:	And how about your neighbours – would they see you differently because you mother wasn’t a local woman?
MR:	We were considered sometimes to be snobs [laughs].  Because Mummy was very particularly about we dressed and on Sunday, you had to wear your hat and you had to wear your gloves and you know, people thought who did they think they are? [Laughs].  
MM:	What about Sundays, going to church, was there much connection with the local priest? MR:	Oh yes.
MM:	What about involvement in religious rituals?  Did you have to make communion and confirmation and all that?
MR:	Oh yes, you did that all through the school and em, every[pause]all my friends were involved in the Children of Mary.  You went there once a month, I think it was, and the boys were all the Holy Family Confraternity.  There was a lot of connection with the church.
MM:	Who would have organised that?  Was it local people or the priest?
MR:	Oh the priest.
MM:	In the South, the local parish priest is generally the manager of the Catholic primary school.  Was that the case here?
MR:	Yes that’s right.  
MM:	Would that mean he kept control?
MR:	Yes, he’d have control over the school.
MM:	How did that affect people’s attitudes?  Maybe a young woman getting pregnant before she was married, how would the community have reacted?
MR:	When I was young, people just didn’t talk about that kind of thing.  I don’t remember ever having known anything about that.
MM:	So if it happened, it was kept very quiet.
MR:	Probably.  You know, it wasn’t discussed or made public.
MM:	And would you know any people who grew up in the Protestant working class areas of Belfast?
MR:	No.  
MM:	The experience you’re describing is so like the experience of people in the South that, in spite of the fact that there’s supposed to be such differences in the communities and yet women I’ve spoken to in the Shankill also talk about the same kind of thing.
MR:	Really?
MM:	Yes.  It just shows that the communities aren’t that different.
MR:	That’s right.  I think the people in the Shankill and the people in the Falls are very very similar.  You know, the people in the Shankill [pause] all right, some of them might have had better jobs, their men may have had better jobs, but they all had the same problems.  There was a lot of poverty about and a lot of control.  Maybe the Protestant churches didn’t control as much as the Catholic churches [pause] our lives sort of, you know, were going to Mass, going to the Confraternity, you know.  Going to the ceilidh at the parochial hall.
MM:	So for instance if you were playing camogie through the local GAA club, would that have had connections with the church?  
MR:	No, it was just the GAA.
MM:	Looking back at sport and everything else, it sounds like you had fairly busy lives.  Do you look back on yours as a happy childhood?
MR:	Oh yes.  I think so.  I knew[pause]when we were very young we were playing a lot of games in the street, like[pause]peery and whip and tig and rounders and[pause]you know we actually played in the street then.  All the street games, you know, they didn’t have television, obviously.  We didn’t have a radio until my youngest sister was born and she’s fifty one.  We didn’t have a radio until she was born.
MM:	On cold winter nights you couldn’t play camogie, what would you do?  Would the family sit together?
MR:	Sit together, yes, around the fire and knit or[pause]my mother used to make rugs out of pieces of cotton.
MM:	In addition to these activities, would you read together?
MR:	Yes.  My father was very insistent that we read and he bought us[pause]he used to cut vouchers out of the newspapers and send away for books.  Although he wasn’t[pause]he could read and write but very limited, but he was very insistent that we had a good education as far as he was able and em, he bought us a range of Dickens’s books and he used to send away to the newspapers for different offers that were on, of books.
MM:	Can you remember what sort of books they were?
MR:	Atlases and educational books.  It was him that started me off.  And he used to teach us to draw.  He was very good at reading plans even though he wasn’t a great reader, he could read plans.  You know, for roofs, for buildings and that.  So he would buy us books and teach us.  I remember him teaching me how to draw an open box, you know?
MM:	Would your mother have taken part in this?
MR:	She was always very busy with the children.  Daddy used to take us [pause] he loved the theatre and the pantomime or any shows that were on.  He was involved in a dramatic group.  I used to wonder [pause] I wonder why my mother never goes but in later years I thought, it was because she was too busy.  She always had a busy.  She didn’t have time.
MM:	Your mother must have put in an incredibly long day.
MR:	Probably.
MM:	So can you remember, while she had the washing machine, she still had cold water that she to heat.  Did she have a range or a cooker?
MR:	She had a cooker and the open fire.
MM:	So when she came down in the morning she would have had to get the fire going and[pause]was it a gas cooker?
MR:	Yes, I think it was a gas cooker.
MM:	So would you remember did she make breakfast for everybody?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	So presumably that was breakfast for eight as well as herself and her father?  Would anybody have been able to come home in the middle of the day or did she have that time to herself?
MR:	Well, when we were at school we all came home at lunchtime.  The school was only a few streets away and then she would make, maybe[pause]she used to make a thing called ‘bread and milk’.  Probably she made that because she hadn’t the money to make anything else.  We used to have that sometimes at lunchtime.
MM:	That’s bread and hot milk and sugar all mixed up?  We used to call it ‘goody two shoes’ and we got it when we were ill. (Both laugh).  I don’t know where the name came from.  And were the shops local shops?
MR:	Yes.  Well, my grandmother had a shop, a grocery shop, and she did her shopping there. 
MM:	Would that mean walking out and carrying the groceries home?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	What about deliveries of vegetables[pause]did they have them?
MR:	Well, we had people coming around the streets with carts, with the milk and with vegetables and oh yes, with bread.  My Uncle Tommy was her breadman.  And eh, they came round the street with the big cans in the back of the cart, two big cans and you’d do out with a great big jug and fill it up with milk.
MM:	So that jug of milk would do for the day?
MR:	Yes, probably.
MM:	How did she keep that cool?
MR:	I can’t remember.  I don’t remember us ever having a larder.  I don’t remember how she would have kept it cool.
MM:	We take fridges and everything so much for granted.  
MR:	That’s true.  I remember she used to make potatoes and butter and fried herrings.  I always loved that.
MM:	And they were caught locally, were they?  
MR:	Ardglass, Ardglass herrings.  The man used to come round the street with them on the cart as well  [laughs].
MM:	So most things were brought into the area?
MR:	Yes, brought around the streets in carts.
MM:	So, as she was making your clothes she didn’t have to go to the city centre for shopping?
MR:	No, not a lot, not a lot.
MM:	Would there have been special occasions when you might have gone into town? Say, like for first communion?
MR:	Yes, they were celebrated and I remember my first communion day, I got sixpence and I bought a pink parasol with a red rose on it.  (Both laugh)  I can still remember that.
MM:	Was that, you know, people seem to go to such excess now, would that have happened?
MR:	Oh no.  No, everybody just went and usually you had your dress made and you just went to the chapel and home and that was it.
MM:	Confirmation was a big day as well?
MR:	Yes, but you wore a white dress for confirmation and now they don’t.  Yes, you wore a white dress and a veil for confirmation.
MM:	You know the way, particularly in recent years, there’s been such controversy about the parades for the Orange Lodge, would you in the Falls area have Corpus Christi processions?
MR:	Oh yes.  
MM:	Did everybody take part?
MR:	I belonged to St. Peter’s Cathedral, it was a pro-Cathedral then and we had processions around the church, round the streets, you know, and if you had just made your first holy communion you wore your first holy communion dress and veil or your confirmation, you wore the outfit that you wore.  And they were big days, they were very big days.
MM:	And all the bunting in the streets?  Do they still go on?
MR:	I don’t think they go on now.  If they do, it’s on a very minor scale.  They used to be great big days that you really looked forward to, getting dressed and walking in the procession.
MM:	And would you have been aware of people who stayed out of them, in the area, or did everybody join in?
MR:	Everybody joined in.  I think anything that was going on people joined in because it was sort of the only entertainment they had, you know it was something to look forward to.  They didn’t have television or going away on holiday.  Well, we always went to Cushendun for our holidays.
MM:	Were you exceptional in that?
MR:	Yes, we were.  Now we just went for a week and eh, we always went for a week to Cushendun every year and then we started going to Glenard.
MM:	Was that because you wanted to get out to the seaside?
MR:	Yes.  Daddy used to bring us to Helen’s Bay on the train.  That was a treat.
MM:	Did your Mum go along on those trips?
MR:	Oh yes, she did.
MM:	One of the things I remember when I was growing up was I used to swim competitively and we would come up to the North for galas and the facilities were so far superior to anything we had in the South.  Was that the case just for later or would there have been such good sporting facilities when you were young?
MR:	We used to go to the swimming.  It was the Falls Baths and they had hot baths, because nobody had[pause]no one had a bathroom.  So you could go and have a hot bath in this building as well and there was part of it had baths and the other part of it was for swimming.
MM:	Was that a common practice?
MR:	Oh yes, it was the only way you could have a bath really.
MM:	I have visions of the tin bath in front of the fire.
MR:	Oh yes, we had that, we had that as well. But then when we were older we used to go to have the hot bath.
MM:	Would your parents have done that or would they have had a bath at home?
MR:	They’d have had a bath at home but sometimes they’d go for a hot bath too.
MM:	I imagine it must have been very hard to heat enough water to have baths at home.
MR:	It was, yes, very hard. 
MM:	How did you manage when the girls were getting into teenage years and the boys getting older, in terms of keeping them separate?
MR:	Well we all had to sleep in the one bedroom.  There was four of us in one bed, girls in one bed and four boys in the other bed. [laughs] Three boys in one bed and four girls in the other and then the youngest one, she slept in Mum and Dad’s room.  We thought nothing of it really.
MM:	Well I suppose everybody had the same conditions.
MR:	Yes, everybody had two bedrooms, so you know, no matter how many they had, that was just the way it was.
MM:	I only moved into my house fairly recently and most of my neighbours are quite elderly but the house that I live in now, I share with my daughter and I’ve been told that at one stage it had a family with nineteen children. (Both laugh).  We can’t imagine where they all fitted but they obviously managed.
MR:	People have so much more now, so much more space and everything now, don’t they?
MM:	I know one of the women who spoke to me in Dublin felt that[pause]she felt very sorry for young people now because she said, that while materially they are much better off, she felt that their lives are much emptier.
MR:	They are.  We had a great time when we were young.  We were playing together in the streets.  We used to play all the street games and the women used to come out and sit on a chair outside the door and just watch all the kids in the street.  And in some streets, they used to play bingo, but it wasn’t called bingo it was called ‘housey-housey’ and eh, there was a few streets and they used to come out to the doors and I suppose they paid a few pence and then, they got these cards and they played housey-housey in the streets in the summer time.
MM:	Who did the calling:
MR:	I suppose one of the men.  I’d forgotten about that now.  I remember them doing that.  You see this was all the sort of home-made entertainment that people had and then there was more companionship and people, everybody knew everybody else.  Whereas now, you could live in a street and not know anyone.
MM:	You know, people always remark about Ireland and the number of pubs in every street[pause]Belfast obviously had different licensing laws but were pubs places[pause]now, you see kids going in on Sundays nearly for the day (and I don’t agree with that at all) but em, within the[pause]would women have gone into the pubs or was it a male preserve?
MR:	Oh it was definitely a male preserve.
MM:	Were there any forms of entertainment other than church activities and sports, where men and women could do things together?
MR:	The cinemas.  There were four or five cinemas near where we lived, but they were only  really once every couple of weeks, people couldn’t afford to go.  Although it wasn’t very expensive to go – it was a 1d to go to the matinee.  The Saturday matinee, which was a great thing on a Saturday, all the kids went to the matinee. 
MM:	You could go by yourselves?
MR:	Actually, it was just in the street right behind us, we went to.
MM:	And would the parish hall near the church have had dances?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	And would your parents go to them or was it just for the younger people?
MR:	For the younger people, really.
MM:	I know a woman who worked as a counter girl in Woolworths and she had to walk two miles to work and then she was on her feet all day and had to walk home but she said that every Friday and Saturday, even though she worked all day Saturday as well, as soon as she got home she got into her fancy dress and she went off dancing until one or two in the morning and she was still up for work the next day.  Her sheer energy was amazing but dancing was a very important part of her life.
MR:	Oh yes, it was, yes.
MM:	In that part of the whole Irish culture thing, the ceilidhs were regular, were they?
MR:	Yes.
MM:	And who organised them?
MR:	The churches.
MM:	Did you learn Irish dancing at an early age?
MR:	I did, yes.
MM:	Was that at school?
MR:	No, I went to a class.
MM:	So would your parents have had to find the money for that?
MR:	I don’t suppose it was very expensive, but it was an extra expense.
MM:	And would all the children have done this?
MR:	Yes, most of them went to Irish dancing classes.
MM:	And what about your parents, did they speak Irish?
MR:	No.  We learned it at school.
MM:	Was that because you were in a Catholic school?
MR:	Oh yes.
MM:	Were they state-funded schools?
MR:	No they were Catholic schools.  In the Catholic schools we learned Irish, and Irish history.  The Protestant schools don’t, they learn English history.
MM:	What about Northern Irish history?
MR:	They haven’t a clue. [laughs]
MM:	Is that true even now?
MR:	Even now, yes.
MM:	It must make it very difficult to take a balanced view of things if you don’t know anything about your history.
MR:	They don’t know anything about it.  It is very hard.  
MM:	If you were starting work now, for the first time, compared to when you started back years ago, would you feel that you were going into a better environment?  Would the changes over the years strike you as for better or worse?
MR:	It’s a bit better, really, especially if you’ve a trade union behind you.  Again, I always think I’m a little prejudiced about the trade unions because the Royal Victoria Hospital was very well serviced by the union and all the hospitals are.  Whereas I hear my sons and son in law and they’re saying “och, why would you join the trade unions, they do nothing for you” and I’m amazed by this because we were so[pause]we serviced our members so well in the Royal and I can’t understand why the big unions aren’t helping the people so much.
MM:	One thing I must say I find among union activists is that they ask all the time what are they going to do for us and I always well the whole thing is that we come together to do things for ourselves.  And I wondered if that’s something the trade union movement is losing.  Would you remember, you know, when you first got involved was the attitude that the union was there for people to be looked after or was there more about working people sticking together for their own protection.
MR:	It was about working people for their own protection.  People who aren’t activists, they expect activists to stand up for them but they will let you down very badly at times.  They won’t back you; they won’t back you up.
MM:	I’m sad to hear you say that, because I rather hoped that it was something that maybe was developing with modern attitudes to work, that it could be changed back, but I suppose people are people. [Both laugh]  There’ll always be those who lean on everybody else.
MR:	Oh that’s true.  I always think that in everything, trade unions or anything, it’s always the same, or even committees and that, it’s always the same people who do all the work and all the others follow.  And the same people are left to do all the work.  And I think it’s the same in every community, you know, a few people do the work and the rest sit back and take the benefits.
Maureen Interview, 6th August 1999

MR1

