Meta, Guildford. Interview: 6th December 2003

ML:	My Christian names are Martha Josephine, they’re my baptismal names, but I was always called Meta in the North of Ireland, which is quite a common name for Margaret or Martha.   My husband, being English, had never heard of it so he said I will call you Meta and that is how everybody in England calls me Meta, from the North of Ireland diminutive.  I came in 1937 to Liverpool to do nursing.  I had got my Northern Ireland Commercial Certificate and that was a full two years at the technical college in Coleraine.  Then I stayed on another year because my mother had died just then and I hadn’t got a job, so my father said you might as well go back another year.  So that was shorthand, typewriting, bookkeeping, commercial arithmetic, English literature.  We did a lot of English literature – Shakespeare’s plays, very good education we got there.
MM:	Was that straight after primary school?
ML:	Yes.  I went there at fourteen and I got my Pitman certificate for fifty words per minute then, and I have forgotten what it was for typing, but then the other year, I did ninety words per minute for my certificate.  So that when I came to Liverpool to do my training, I was head and heels above the English girls in education, because they had probably just gone to secondary, or whatever, left school at fifteen perhaps.  But we had a lot of essays to write and we had, of course, business letters to write so that we were very au fait with the English language and punctuation and everything else like that.  A lot of Welsh girls were there as well and some from Ireland and some from the North of Ireland.
MM:	Why did you choose Liverpool rather than training in the North?
ML:	Well, I had a sister there who lived at a place called Parbold, which is between Southport and Wigan, and that was why, so that I could go there on my day off.  That was the reason why I went to Liverpool.  
MM:	You applied from the North, did you, or directly from Liverpool?
ML:	No, when I came to my sister’s, my sister had got a little boy of three and then she had a little girl and she had to have a repair and my father said well, as you are not working you go and help Greta.  And so I had visited Greta in the hospital in Liverpool on a Sunday with her husband and somebody looked after the children and she had been talking to the student nurses.  I said to her you know I think I might do nursing.  I said at least I will have my food and lodgings and I will be looked after that way and I will be working with a nice sort of person.  You see, we were conscious of the sort of people we were mixed around with.
MM:	So it wasn’t a great vocation to care for others?
M:	[Laughs] No, it wasn’t, absolutely, because I mean in Coleraine in those days it was just a little market town and there was very little in the way of jobs for shorthand typists.  There would be one or two solicitors and there would be a couple of potato merchants and coal merchants, just sort of sending out bills and that sort of thing, but I mean we were all doing this shorthand like mad for an hour every morning and after lunch, I suppose.  He was dictating, the master, and we were doing it all as though there was a job waiting for us when we finished, and we all knew that there wouldn’t be, so that was how I came to do nursing, why I went to Liverpool, it was because of my sister originally.
MM:	At that stage I presume you thought that would guarantee you work?
ML:	That’s right.
MM:	So when you qualified, did you stay in Liverpool?
ML:	When I qualified, this is where the war came in, I started in the May of 1937 and I took my finals in June of 1940.  Then I went on from there and took my midwifery but we used to have what we called a hospital examination, three months before your finals.  It was a run through of what the final would be and according to how you passed, those who did well and were doing midwifery, and you couldn’t get out of it, you had to do your midwifery, went on to maternity ward.  And if you had passed, you had done six weeks of your training.  If you hadn’t, of course, you waited to do general nursing, but anyway, I had passed it quite well so that when the results came out and I had passed, I had already done my midwifery so that I finished by the 23rd December.  Then I went to stay with my sister at Parbold and applied for all sorts of jobs, but because I was going to get married, I wanted a staff nurse’s post.  No one would employ a nurse getting married, and marrying a soldier.  They thought, you see, that you’d always be wanting leave and I think in those times, I think when soldiers were given leave they were expected to let the wife have that time off.  And someone suggested to me to try the Civil Nursing Reserve and that’s what I did.  I applied to the Civil Nursing Reserve with Lancashire County Council and their headquarters were in Preston.
MM:	So it was like an auxiliary arm of the forces but you were a civilian?
ML:	That’s right, yes.  I was called [pause] I went to Preston and I was interviewed by the Medical Officer for Lancashire County Council, a very nice man, a Dr. Gaughan.  Actually, his brother was the dental surgeon at Bolton Hospital, where I’d worked in the dental department, so I knew Mr. Gaughan well.  He was a very nice man and he said there are two opportunities; a first aid post in Manchester, with the bombs falling around you, or a sick bay for evacuated children, which was in Blackpool, so I chose that.  When I first went there, there was what they called a Matron in Charge and then I did night duty for a little bit because all these evacuated children from Liverpool and Manchester, they had impetigo and scabies and they were in their billets you see.  And aneuresis, which is bedwetting.  And of course, the lady couldn’t cope – in those days, they might have had two or three sleeping in a bed, I don’t know – and so there had to be someone on night duty to potty the children and things like that.  One day I was there for about six weeks and it was January or February and there was snow on the ground and one of the nurses came up and said Dr. Gaughan is here from County Hall and he wants to see you.  So I hastily got dressed and went down there and anyway, to cut a long story short, there had been an episode there with the Matron and another older assistant nurse.  I didn’t know anything about the sort of relations, in my education there had been no mention of lesbians or such things, and of course, they left right away.  So he said that anyway, she was leaving and he would like me temporarily to take charge.  Well, I said I’m only just qualified and all that kind of thing and he said I will send someone out from the Accounts Department in County Hall to show you about the petty cash.  Because it was a huge big house out in the country and with its own vegetable garden and all that, there was a cook came every day from Preston, there were three women from the village who were cleaners and general work about  and I had to pay them every week.
MM:	It was a very big responsibility.
ML:	It was but I didn’t tell Dr. Gaughan that I had commercial training [laughs].  But you see, it was responsible because I was only twenty-one or twenty-two, something like that and apart from my training, I hadn’t much experience.
MM:	Would it have been because of the war that there was no one else to step in to the Matron’s shoes?
ML:	Yes, well you see that anyone who was available, they wanted them to go into the forces.  We’ll come to that later on but anyway, what was the important thing was the ration books.  Everything was rationed and we had to account for all the meals.  We had the ration books for these children and all the staff who were living in, we had their ration books.  Because the children had to have education, there were one or two ex-governesses, I suppose you would call them, rather mature women but very nice women and we had all these ration books.  Well, I had to go every Monday morning into a town called Kirkham, where eventually we were married in the Methodist church there in Kirkham, to see the Food Officer and I had to account for all the meals.  You see we had coupons as well, I don’t know if you know anything about it but the like of sardines and jelly and tinned fruit and Spam and tinned salmon were so many points.  Biscuits, everything had points and so I had to account for all these.
MM:	And were you still doing your share of nursing on top of the administrative work?
ML:	We did the treatments at night.  They were bathed and given the treatment for scabies or impetigo.  I supervised that, the treatments for them, and I supervised all that.
MM:	You must have been working very long hours.
ML:	Yes, well, you would have a break during the day because if the children were in the class, you were free.  There were no children under five.  They were aged five till about twelve or thirteen and sometimes you had two or three in the one family.  I remember a family called Lloyd and there were three of them, one of them barely five.  Near there, there was another house about two miles away called Primrose Lodge, I think it was, and that was for expectant mothers and this Mrs. Lloyd was in there.  About once a week or once every ten days, by ambulance, she’d be brought to see the children but it was out of school hours.  Well, then, of course, when she came we gave her a cup of tea and we told her about the children and perhaps their father, you see, who was in the army, when he would come on leave of course, he would want to come and see his children.  
MM:	Was that the case for all of the children in the hospital, that their parents would have access?
ML:	Yes, that’s right.
MM:	Maybe just not see them very often?
ML:	Yes.  But they were from poorer homes because of course, the more affluent ones were evacuated privately and some of them even went to America.  But I often think now of all those little children marched down to the railway station with just a label on them and it must have been terrible for the mothers to part with them, not knowing where they were going to.  But the gardener worked very well and he supplied us with vegetables.  The cook, she did very well and she would see the butcher.  The butcher called her every day and she would order what we needed for the staff and for the children.
MM:	You had the staff ration books as well?
ML:	Yes, I had to account for everything.  But it was really quite easy.  But then the doctor – it was a local doctor who was on call – he would do a round once a week and come to see that they were all healthy and everything was all right.
MM:	Were you made [pause] actually formally appointed as Matron?
ML:	Yes.
MM:	Even though you were very recently qualified as a staff nurse?
ML:	After a time – Dr. Gaughan would come out about once a month and of course, I was probably in touch with his department every day.  There was another nurse – a Lancashire woman but I’ve forgotten her name – and she had a little frilly cap with a bow underneath here [indicating chin].
MM:	Would the hospital originally have been a private house?
ML:	Yes, that house was requisitioned and all the equipment and everything was set up when I went there.  Well, then I got married from there.
MM:	When did you meet your husband?  Was that while you were in Kirkham?
ML:	I met him in Liverpool during the second year of my training.  Actually, he was nearly three years younger than me, he was only seventeen when I met him.  He came from Warwick but his father had been [pause] he was a sailor but he was born in Warwick where his mother came from, but his father had been a Bootle man and he persuaded her to move up to Liverpool.  After coming from a little, quiet county town like Warwick to Bootle, of all places, it was such a shock.
MM:	There was a lot of bombing in Liverpool, wasn’t there?
ML:	Yes, and unemployment and the poverty there.  She’d never known anything like it.  She only lived about ten years.  I think he was about ten when they moved up and of course, he was a bright boy.  They said in Warwick that they were sorry he was leaving.  I’ve got his headmaster’s report, you know, that he would have got what they called a scholarship in those days, so of course, he got a scholarship to Waterloo Grammar School and he was the only boy that they’d ever had from this school in Bootle.  And then, when he’d been there about six months they discovered that he was sort of over the border, he shouldn’t have been at Waterloo Grammar School and he had to transfer to Bootle Grammar School.
MM:	Was that not as good?
ML:	No, and the area wasn’t so good, but you see, he was an only child and his mother had two or three maiden aunts who were in service in those days in Warwick.  The Countess of Warwick – everybody worked at the castle and they were rather nice people, very nice.  His mother was very upset then.  When he came to sixteen and got his higher certificate they said now you’re sixteen you’ve got to get a job, we can’t let you go on for higher education.  And so the head of the Chemistry Department got him into what was then – it’s now Evans Medical but it was Evans, Fletcher and Webb, the manufacturing chemists and he was in the laboratories there.  And that’s where he was when I met him.
MM:	So he wasn’t a soldier at that point?  Did he join up because of the war?  
ML:	Well, he was called up.  
MM:	Were you conscripted as well for the labour force, because you’d married an Englishman?
ML:	No, not at all, because I was in England doing my training anyway.  I wouldn’t have gone back to the North of Ireland.  After my training, I wouldn’t have gone back.
MM:	Why was that?
ML:	There were so few hospitals there.  I liked the bright lights of Liverpool [laughs].  There were tramcars, and pictures, and the theatre and the river and all that.  Liverpool, in those days, with the overhead railway - in 1937, Liverpool was a lovely place to be.  And the people were so kind.  I was in the Municipal Hospital.  There were two sorts of hospitals.  The Voluntary, which was like the private hospital, and then the Municipal one.  We were fairly near the docks and we got a lot of sailors from the docks.  It was a very good training.  Then in 1940, October, just a year after the war started, his mother died.  She never knew that Godfrey was conscripted but by this time, with the war being on, his father was no longer going to sea so he had a shore job.  
MM:	Presumably he would have been a bit older at that stage?
ML:	Yes, he would.  I think he probably was in at the end of the First World War.
MM:	Just going back to your own position, as a staff nurse, being promoted overnight to Matron, were any of the other staff resentful that you were the one being promoted, despite your inexperience?
ML:	No, because I was the only trained nurse.  There was another who was fever trained but the fever training is a shorter [pause] it’s only a two-year training as compared to three.  She would have been further down the ladder.  Children’s training was further down the ladder too.
MM:	Did it make much difference to your pay?
ML:	It probably did but then the pay wasn’t much in those days and we would had lovely food and everything was done very well.
MM:	And they would have been fairly self sufficient, having the garden?
ML:	Yes.  We didn’t have any chickens or anything like that, but everything else, all the vegetables.
MM:	It was probably a healthier diet than most of the children had had before.
ML:	Yes, it was, and of course, meat was very severely rationed and sausages were an extra.  They might have been on points, and liver of course, that was difficult to get.
MM:	And were you completely away from bombing or the more immediate dangers of war?
ML:	Oh yes, absolutely.  We were on the bus route between Preston and Blackpool and on my afternoon off I would go into Blackpool.  And of course, there were a great many Polish airmen there at Blackpool.
MM:	Was there an aerodrome or something nearby?
ML:	There was, Wheaton it was called.  Nurse Ellen Gibbons, she was the fever-trained nurse, she was Scottish and her husband was actually stationed at Wheaton.  He was an airman but she lived in with us.
MM:	You said you got married from the hospital?  How did that work?
ML:	That worked out very well because either my husband or I, we had to be married where we were resident and he was up then, he was in the Royal Engineers, he eventually ended up in R.E.M.I. when it was formed but he was in the Royal Engineers and he was up in Keswick.  He was apt to be moved around so his wasn’t really a permanent address so that was the one [pause] and I was married in the Methodist church at Kirkham, where the Food Office was.  
MM:	And did you have a traditional white wedding?
ML:	Yes, I did.  Before that, he was the in Isle of White and when he was there, in Cowes, there was a firm of tailors that made military uniforms and for the navy and all like that, and he had that suit made.  There is my wedding photograph [laughs] and my sister helped me out with coupons for my dress.  It was a lace dress.
MM:	Did you have it made up?
ML:	No, I got it in Liverpool.  It was something like three guineas or something like that, you know?
MM:	That was nearly a week’s wages?
ML:	Oh yes, of course, it was, probably more.  He was twenty-one and I was twenty three.  There was a red stripe down there [pointing to photograph] and these were brass buttons and that.  I’ll show you one of him more recently – that was taken before [pause] it’s about ten years ago that he died.  That is a more recent one when he was Professor of Chemistry at the University of Surrey.
MM:	So obviously he did at some stage get on to his third level education.
ML:	Yes, he did, he was determined to get the degree and [pause] well, then I stayed there until a couple of years, I suppose, and I left to have David.  I left about that September or October.  My sister was still living at Purbold so I went to stay with Greta when I was expecting David and he was born in Southport.  My husband was transferred down here and he went on various courses.  Of course, he worked very well and very hard and got good marks and he eventually ended up as an instructor at the army radio school at Petersham, which is outside Richmond, between Kingston and Petersham.  I was up there and David was a baby, about nine months, and he said I’m in billets down here in Petersham, I’m going to look out for a flat and David and you will come and join me.  And we did that.  David was about fourteen months when we went to Richmond and we had a flat in Petersham and we lived in the Richmond area.  Two years in Petersham and then ten in Richmond.  He was never moved from the army radio school.  He was instructing officers that were going out to France, on radio, because of course, it was very early days for radio then.  This was 1943 or 1944 and anyway, I got a letter from the War Office or somebody saying you are very valuable as a trained nurse.  Would you come back and do nursing in a hospital and you could relieve a single state registered nurse to go in the army, for a military hospital.  You see, I wasn’t suitable because I had to care for David so anyway, I went along and I saw the Matron at Richmond Hospital and so she said yes, and there was no problem at all.  David went to a day nursery – he got priority in a day nursery.
MM:	This was a government run facility?
ML:	Oh yes, it was government run and we didn’t have to pay to put him in the day nursery.  Now those day nurseries were very well run in those days.  It was an S.R.N. who was in charge of it and David was quite happy there.  Well then I started work.
MM:	Were you doing a day shift?
ML:	I was staff nurse and I could only work nine to five because they were the hours of the day nursery, probably half past eight to five, and I was on the [pause] they had a private ward there attached to the medical ward, it was called the Archer Wing, named after Sir John Archer who’d been the architect of it.  And I was the staff nurse there for about a fortnight and then Matron sent for me and she said because you’re not there to relieve Sister and write the reports in the evening and that, she said I think it would be better if you were on Casualty and Outpatients.  
MM:	You hadn’t done that kind of nursing before?
ML:	No, only just in my training, as we do, but it was just for a short time.  So anyway, I went to Casualty.  There was a Sister there and my goodness, she was a strict one.  She trained at the Edinburgh Royal and the Simpson Memorial and the discipline, my goodness, I don’t know what she’d say if she were around now.  There were no Christian names or anything like that.  I liked it very much in Casualty and I got on very well with Sister.  It was a very busy department.  The clinics were very big.  You see, in the morning [pause] you had Casualty all day long, of course, and there would be about four or five student nurses on as well as myself and Sister and we had clinics in the afternoon.  I might be doing the Orthopaedics here while she would be doing the Medical one up there.
MM:	These would be follow-ons to people who had come in through Casualty?
ML:	Yes, they were referred from the doctors to the consultants.  They were all consultants at the clinics, you see.  With Richmond there, it covered a very big area because there was Kew and Mortlake, right up to Hammersmith, there was Chiswick, there was part of it over the bridge in what was Middlesex, Twickenham, St. Margaret’s as far as Hampton and half way to Kingston on that side.  We covered a very, very large area and the clinics were very busy.
MM:	What about [pause] were there more Casualties coming in than during peacetime?  Doodlebugs and that sort of thing?
ML:	Yes, that’s right.  There was one incident at Kew where one of those doodlebugs was a direct hit on Chryslers car factory and there were a lot of casualties in there.  That was a dreadful episode.  
MM:	How would you have managed – something like that obviously wouldn’t stop at five.  Were you able to stay on?
ML:	Yes, you’d have to carry on but you see, my husband – the army radio school, apart from where he was on what was called fire watching which would be maybe once a fortnight, as he was staff sergeant at this time – he could collect David.
MM:	So you did have a bit of flexibility?
ML:	Yes.  Wednesday afternoons, Sister took the day off and in the mornings we had the dental clinic, my goodness, that was like a madhouse, because there were a lot of – let me say it, the Irish labourers – who’d never been to a dentist in their lives and they were total extractions.  They had to have gas and air and of course, the teeth were flying like this [laughs] and then in the afternoon, of course, Sister would march off at one o’clock and I had lunch from twelve to one, there would be minor ops.  They were circumcisions or cervaceous cysts and I was in charge of all that.  
MM:	And this was on top of all the people coming after accidents or whatever?
ML:	Yes.  The casualties were more at the weekend.  I’ll tell you when we had a lot, particularly at weekends, remembering that all the seaside places were all closed and Richmond’s proximity to London on the District Line, you got a lot of day trippers.  A lot of people paddling in the river got cut feet, we always had about a dozen cut feet at the weekends.
MM:	They were paddling in the Thames?
ML:	Yes, in the Thames, because of course, the Petersham Meadows was still there and the river runs all the way along and there were pleasure boats going up and down.  And people would go there, they would picnic; on the bank holidays on those meadows you couldn’t put a pin down.  People were sitting with their sandwiches and they were flocking out of the station in the morning.
MM:	It gives quite a picture of life going on as usual, even though it was the height of the war.
ML:	That’s right and a lot of them were women on their own with their children or Grandma would be with them because of course, the fathers were away.  There was also the Orthopaedic clinic and the Surgical clinic where you’d have instruments to get ready and bandage rolls and that kind of thing.
MM:	The particular incident you were telling me about, with the Archbishop, this was while you were working at Richmond?
ML:	Yes, that’s right and you see, Richmond hospital had been the London home of Lord Shaftesbury.  It’s on Shaftesbury Avenue and it was, it had been just a great big house and it was the side entrance was the Outpatients and Casualty, the main entrance was the administrative part and where Matron’s office was and Lord Auckland, who was the Hospital Governor.  They would come in there and it was like a great big open hall and in one corner was the receptionist taking their names and giving them an admission card and telling you where to sit until you were called in for your treatment.  And then also there was the Dispensary, with a Dispenser there and an X-Ray Department was just along the corridor.  We had quite a few volunteers, Red Cross volunteers, and they would do [pause] escort patients to X-Ray, you see casualties would come in and their arm or their leg and they would have to be pushed in a wheelchair to the X-Ray Department and wait and bring back the wet plate to be seen.  
MM:	Would these have been older people who hadn’t been needed for the main labour force?
ML:	Yes, but all age groups really, not so many as you mention, like middle-aged.  At the back of the hospital there were the playing fields and there was the rugby team.  They were a well-known London one and on a Saturday afternoon they were playing rugby there and of course, the casualties would come in regularly.  But of course, Sister always took the weekend – Saturday was her day off as well and of course, I was always left on a Saturday.  Well, the day nursery finished at one o’clock on a Saturday and there was an overflow of children in the day nursery so they opened another one at Ham, which is Petersham, two miles out.  So what I used to do in the morning, David was getting on for three at this time, and we took them to the Town Hall and downstairs was the basement and that was sort of a waiting room for them.  And the ambulances would come and they used to take the children off in the ambulances and that and then you would collect them there at a quarter to six in the evening.  But I knew the ambulance men, you see, and they knew me so on a Saturday afternoon at one o’clock they would bring David to Casualty and I would sit him in the end room with toys and of course, he would hear these casualties being stitched up and that kept him very quiet [laughs].  
MM:	He must have had a very peculiar idea of what you might do if he misbehaved.
ML:	Some of the nurses would say, Staff I’m off this afternoon and I’m going up the town, would you like me to take your little boy?  So David was going and having his tea in Fullers with coffee walnut cake and he had a good time.
MM:	That was very good training for him.
ML:	Yes, he enjoyed it.  He can still remember some of that.  But he didn’t kick up a fuss, he never came out of that room and bother me at all and I used to just check that he was all right and people were going in and out all the time, so he was fine.  You see, this big hall was divided up and then there was just cubicles.  Well, of course, my Lord the Archbishop was in the first cubicle where casualties came in first because there was a couch there with the lights and then the doctor would examine them and see what was wrong and say whether it needed an X-Ray or that and then they’d be transferred to another cubicle to have their treatment.  But they were only very thin walls so you could hear what was going on in all of them.  
MM:	Would Sister have been aware of your arrangement for David?
ML:	Oh absolutely, that was all right with the Matron and the Assistant Matrons and that, they’d do a round of the wards and they would do a round of Casualty as well and they would go in and talk to David.  Oh yes, they all knew and it was agreeable.
MM:	I can’t imagine it happening now but Casualties now – they can be quite violent places.  
ML:	No, you couldn’t do that now.  You see, they couldn’t spare me on Saturday afternoon and that was the only arrangement [pause] if my husband happened to be off, if he wasn’t on guard or on duty or anything, then he would come down to Casualty and collect David at three o’clock.  
MM:	How many days a week did you work?  Was it six?
ML:	Now, I worked Saturday and I had Sunday off.  It was five days [pause] yes, it was six days a week.
MM:	Quite a long week.
ML:	Yes, it was but then you didn’t mind in those days.  
MM:	Well, I suppose because so many people were much worse off.  
ML:	Saturday normally wasn’t very busy, apart from the afternoon in Casualty and then we used to take that time for clearing out the instrument cupboards and putting re-lining – you know we had lint on a glass shelf for all the instruments, re-sterilising them all and putting them away.  Seeing the needles were all sharpened, the scalpels were sharp and all that – that was the time for a sort of spring-cleaning on Saturday morning.  And then the Plaster Room at the end, well, that was chaotic [laughs].
MM:	How did you manage your own domestic routine?  It was probably a help to have your husband around occasionally but it always struck me that life must have been much  harder for women who were doing shopping when you couldn’t really get things very easily.
ML:	During that time, of course he was working nine to five, he had a bicycle and he had a seat on the back of the bicycle that he put David on but he went to Kingston Technical College in the evenings, two evenings a week, maybe three.  He got his Intermediate B.Sc. so when he came to be demobbed, he applied to the army for a grant to go to university and he went for the first interview and he was turned down.  They said no, you were working during the war, your education wasn’t interrupted and he appealed and at the appeal he said my education was interrupted as if I had been full-time at the university.  I was a poor boy and had to leave school and working in a laboratory and studying five evenings a week at Byron Street Technical College in Liverpool so my education was interrupted.  I have now been going to Kingston Technical College and I have got my Intermediate B.Sc. and of course, he got it the second time.  And then he called me up one day and he said can you use your telephone and he gave me the telephone numbers of colleges in London to which he wanted to apply.  I rang one or two and he wanted to go to University College London which was one of the very high ones and so I rang University College and they said we’ve just got a few places left but they’re for ex-servicemen only.  I said send me the application forms [laughs].  And he applied and do you know, they were so impressed that he had got his Intermediate B.Sc. when he was a serving soldier from his school certificate that he got in.  After three years, he worked very, very hard and he got First Class Honours and then there was no problem getting the grant for his Ph.D.  He worked under Sir Christopher Ingold who was one of the very well-known eminent chaps at University College and then when he got his Ph.D. [pause] I’ll tell you what happened [laughs] he started at the university in October and that December, I had a second son.  So of course, that meant that I couldn’t work all the time he was an undergraduate.  David was already five and starting school and so I gave up and we had this flat in Richmond.  The grant was £360 a year and you don’t need a lot of education to know that’s a pound a day or seven pounds a week and the rent of that flat was two guineas a week.  It was 34 Lancaster Park off Richmond Hill and there’s a private school on the corner, the Old Vicarage.  The landlord never put the rent up in the ten years we were there but he didn’t do anything.  So it came about that we were in a ground floor flat but it was leaking everywhere and trees were falling and that but we didn’t mind because we knew we would be saving up for our own house.  Donald was born in the December and I had a lot of trouble.  I was fine but at the end of October, it was about thirty-four weeks and they couldn’t hear the heartbeat.  Both my boys were under five pounds, which as good for me for the delivery because I’m small, with a small pelvis.  I went down to the clinic and I had an arrangement with Mrs. Marshall, the Matron of the Day Nursery, because we were both S.R.N.s and I said to her you know, when I go to the clinic, it’s difficult with David and she said he can come here at any time when you need to attend the clinic.  And that was very good so of course, when I was admitted to the hospital I rang Mrs. Marshall and she said that’s fine, I’ll have a place for him until you come out. Well you see, it was very awkward, my husband had just started the course at university, he couldn’t be missing lectures and so it was very good to have the place.  He would take David down to the Town Hall and collect him at night and I had no pressure in the hospital.  Then when I went in for Donald, he was due at the end of November and he was actually born on the 5th December.  Anyway, he was born very small and very weak.  He had to have a haematologist in and I got out on Christmas Eve, he was three weeks old.  So my husband was holding the fort with David at that end so it was very difficult.  But somehow, we managed.  So long as my husband could get on with his study he didn’t mind.  David would play and he would get up at five o’clock in the morning and work.  Well you see, what helped him as well, he had the practical experience in the laboratory and he always did well at exams.  But there were one or two on his course who were ex-service but they didn’t last the year.  The pressure of being home and family life, they couldn’t do it.  As I say now, Mary, I am educating my grandchildren.  I have educated my husband, I have educated my own boys and now I’m doing my grandchildren, and I’m eight-six years of age [laughs].  
MM:	Quite a set of achievements over the years.
ML:	That was the end of the war, of course, and then his first job was at Battersea Polytechnic and then it became the University of London.
MM:	Did you continue working yourself once things eased financially?
ML:	Yes, I did.  I didn’t work because Donald was a very difficult baby and he needed a lot of attention.  He didn’t gain weight – he wouldn’t suck but he had to be breastfed.  They wouldn’t [pause] I had a lot of trouble breastfeeding because I hadn’t got a big supply of milk and Dr. Cunningham from Londonderry was the paediatrician at Kingston Hospital and he said the only way to save this baby’s life was breastfeeding.  And I said well I’d great difficulty five years ago with the other one so I didn’t work until Donald was [pause] perhaps he’d be about three and then I went to the West Middlesex hospital.  I went back to Richmond Hospital and I saw the Matron and I wanted to do night duty because my husband could look after getting them ready in the morning.  Donald was at a little private school and he was there until he was eight and a half and David was at the ordinary school.  Godfrey would get their breakfast in the morning and when I came in from doing my night duty and cycling from the West Middlesex to Richmond, which was about six miles, they were all out so I just had to get my breakfast and get to bed.  So then I had to get up at half past three to collect Donald and then David in the local school.  They both got their 11-plus which was good.
MM:	Going back to the very early stages when you were leaving Ulster to go to England, would you have thought – I know you were taken by the bright lights and everything – but when you left would it have occurred to you that your life from now on was going to be in England.  Were you thinking of this at all?
ML:	No, I turned my back on Ulster, if that’s the expression, because I thought I couldn’t get a job here when I wanted it and I’m not going back.  England is where I’ll live.
MM:	But you knew that when you first left?
ML:	Well, probably.  Do you know we have Ulster societies here?  They’re few and far between now but they have got one in Kingston and they like to think of Ulster people coming here and doing well and boosting Ulster, but as far as I’m concerned, Ulster did me no good other than I had a good education.  
MM:	Would you think that was partly [pause] was it because of the school system or because of your home circumstances as well?
ML:	Well, home circumstances as well because I was the fourth daughter, we had only one brother, and I was the fourth daughter and my sisters, we used to have a big table in the middle of the kitchen and I remember sitting there and doing my homework.
MM:	What about your own education and prospects – when you were going to primary school, would you have any ideas about your future?
ML:	I went to the country school until I was eleven.  I started when I was three because I was the youngest and my brother was next to me and he was a lovely brother, he would have given me anything.  And one day I was missing and my mother and father were searching and eventually I was found and there was I at school with my brother.  I’d gone down and wandered into the school and from that I sat with my brother and I used to go every day with him.  
MM:	And nobody objected?
ML:	No, no, I would play with bricks and everything and I remember there was a girl called Lily McNeill and she was stealing the bricks from me and Willy was smacking her, you know, and we started there.  You see, we started with our tables and with spellings and with writing - we had a copybook.  That was a much stronger foundation and then I sort of [pause] it seemed then as though I was ahead of the others and you know, when we used to do mental arithmetic and things I always did very well.  I wanted to do well , I didn’t want all the others farmer’s children doing better than I did.  You know there was that element of competition then that you wanted to do well.
MM:	Did you have to do the 11-plus?
ML:	No, there was no 11-plus then but at the age of eleven my mother sent Willy and I – the other three had all gone to what was called Coleraine Model School, it was called the Model School – and we went at the age of eleven.  Well, Willy left at fourteen because my mother got him an apprenticeship as a carpenter so he did five or six years apprenticeship as a carpenter and that was good for him.  Then I went to the Technical School at fourteen.  I shouldn’t have gone until I was fifteen but that was another story [laughs].  My mother knew the Principle because two of my sisters had been there before.  He was the Elder in our Presbyterian church in Coleraine and my mother knew him well.  I did not like being at that Model School, I didn’t like that Dr. Forbes; he was a horrible man.  So she said to him that I was fourteen and he said well, she’s a year young but I’ll tell you what I can do.  She can take the entrance exam, which is a fortnight on Saturday and if she passes, then she can come.  So I passed and then when it came to September and going back to school.  Vicky told me this, my friend Vicky Thompson, she was then Vicky Carr, she said Dr. Forbes was calling out the register and called Martha McKay and she said we shouted out she’s gone to the Tech. [Laughs.]  That is how I came to go early [laughs].  That was just how it worked out.
MM:	And would you, even at that early stage, have decided that you were going to knock the dust of Ulster off your shoes?
ML:	No, I never thought about that.  We had cousins in Glasgow and we used to go to Scotland for our holidays, my sister and I, and I never thought [pause] I never thought anything about it, we just took it as it came.  We had a very happy life there.  You know, the farmer’s children messed in with all the other children.  We always had a week’s holiday in the country school in October for gathering potatoes, but whether you were a farmer’s child or not you all went there.  And we loved being out gathering those potatoes.  It seemed as though the sun was always shining and the blackberries were always ripe on the hedgerows.
MM:	I think that is an indication of a happy childhood, you know, that you convince yourself that the weather was much better then, all evidence to the contrary.  The past assumes a glow.
ML:	That’s right.  Then we used to go out into the fields in the spring and gather primroses.  There were always primroses in the hedgerows and we would bring in a big bunch of primroses.  
(573 words removed – general conversation.)
Meta Interview, 6th December 2003

ML1

