Minnie, Dublin.  Interview: 15th July 2002.

MOR:	I’m Minnie O’R., I was Minnie W., and I lived in Donnycarney from 1929 until 1952, and we moved to Clontarf then.  I have very happy memories of Donnycarney and I remember the day the war started.  My Dad was in the army.
MM:	Was this the Irish army?
MOR:	In the Irish army, yes, and he joined the Irish army in 1922.  Money was very scarce and during the war years he was a non-commissioned officer.  He was a sergeant, a non-commissioned officer and he stayed on then for the Emergency, until the war was over.  He stayed on until 1946.  You see, he was to leave the army during the war but he was asked to stay on, so he stayed on until 1946.
MM:	Was it an army house you were living in?
MOR:	No, we were renting it from the Corporation, as far as I can recollect it was sixteen shillings a week rent.  It went up and down as [pause] sometimes it might be less, but I remember distinctly going down to the rent office, it was every Wednesday, with the sixteen shillings.
MM:	Was your mother working outside the home?
MOR:	No, my mother wasn’t working outside the home.  She did sewing, for the neighbours, if anybody wanted anything made, she did a bit of sewing, and knitting.
MM:	Your Dad’s income was all that was coming in regularly?
MOR:	Yes, my Dad’s income was all that we had.  
MM:	How many children were there in the family?
MOR:	I had five brothers, and one sister but my sister died when I was eight years old.  She was three when she died.  She died before the war started?
MM:	Was that from a childhood illness?
MOR:	Measles.  She was three years old when we went down the country for our summer holidays.  Every year when we got our school holidays Mam took us down to her mother’s and Catherine, as she was known, as with us and she got pneumonia and died.  She got measles and took the pneumonia from the measles.  She died down there, she’s buried in Castleblayney.
MM:	That must have been very hard on your mother.
MOR:	It was very hard on Mam and on my Dad too and on the rest of us.  I thought I had a sister, but I didn’t.  There was just me and the five brothers then, that’s it.
MM:	Was it something in particular that made you remember when the war started?
MOR:	I remember my brother was going on for the priesthood and he was home in September 1939.  He was to go back to College in Cork and he went to Mass on the first Friday and he came back in the back door of the house and he said war has been declared.  I remember those words as well and that was the first Friday in September 1939.
MM:	You understood that this was serious?
MOR:	Oh, I knew what was going on, like I got afraid then.  I was anxious but then I understood that we weren’t in it, that we wouldn’t be going to [pause] that there wouldn’t be anybody in Ireland going to the war, unless people were in the English army.  But I had aunts in England and when the war was on I remember Mammy telling me and I’d one aunt in particular that lived in Coventry.  She was saying she was bombed out and there was a picture of a statue of Our Lady on one wall of the house and that was the only wall left standing.  The whole house was demolished, that was the only wall left standing.  None of her family got hurt, nobody was killed but my Dad’s sister lost two sons in the army.  One was in the army and one was in the navy, I think, and they were killed.  They lived in Birmingham.
MM:	And when the war started, were you anxious about any particular aspect?
MOR:	No, no, it just was fear more than anything else and then food was beginning to get scarce, you see.  Ireland was selling England what she could and then food started to get rationed here then.  There was seven of us in the house then and a pound of butter, maybe not a pound of butter, maybe it would be a block of butter with two clappers and you’d go into a shop and they’d make up the pound by clapping it together.  And they’d give you just the fourteen ounces, no more and no less, you’d get exactly fourteen ounces and that had to do for one week for seven of us.
MM:	My mum was telling me about a friend of hers, she was the one girl in the family and she got beef dripping while the boys got the butter.
MOR:	Yes, well, the thing is that some mothers preferred boys to girls, for what reason I don’t know and that was it.  But, we didn’t get tea, we always got cocoa and you couldn’t get the ordinary cocoa, shell cocoa we got and it was boiling and boiling and boiling, and it was woeful.  And as for the bread, it was getting rationed too; it was getting very scarce.  It was a greyish colour and it was terrible.  You got a big loaf when you got it in the shop but by the time you got it home it was down to nothing.  
MM:	I suppose there was no question that you could get flour to make the bread yourself?
MOR:	No, everything was scarce.  I remember my mother, I don’t know where but every time she saw raisins or currants she’d bring home as much as she could towards Christmas and she was in the process of making her Christmas puddings one year anyway, when she took a cold or flu or something.  Anyway, she took to bed and the big, round enamel basis that she was mixing the whole stuff in - all she had to do was put the wet from the eggs or whatever she was going to put into it.   But every morning – she was in bed for a week or so – and we [pause] she had the basin down in the scullery covered with a big towel.  And of course, we’d shake the basin, the fruit would come to the top and we’d scoop a handful and eat it and that was that.  [Both laugh.]  I didn’t know my brothers were doing it and they didn’t know I was doing it, so when Mum got better anyway, she came down to make the puddings.  She made the puddings, and said nothing, and she made the puddings.  When she saw the pudding being cut, she said I wonder where all my fruit is? – when the pudding was cut it was like the map of Ireland with railway stations, a raisin here and a raisin there, and she said nothing.  All she said was I thought I had more fruit than that, so she didn’t blame any of us for it but we were all at fault.  But she did her best for us anyway.
MM:	Was your Dad away much?
MOR:	Dad was away a lot.  Dad was in – I don’t remember being in Finneran, in Donegal, but I do remember being in Gormanstown in Co. Meath.  
Mam was doing [pause] this was 1941 and Mam was doing some work concerning the Army – putting names in rotation and I was helping her to do it, sorting them out.  And one night we heard the drone of an aeroplane.  Aeroplanes were rare at this time, there were very few, but anyway, these were very loud, at two o’clock in the morning this was, and we looked out the window and we saw two aeroplanes in the sky and my Dad thought they were taking photographs.  That was two nights before they bombed the North Strand.  We were still working at this thing on the Friday night when the bombs did fall and we heard them, and we saw the planes.  The house shook, we heard them and the bombs fell and the house absolutely shook.  Every pane of glass in the windows shook.  I was terrified, terrified.  Donnycarney was only about a mile and a half from the bombing.  Every pane rattled and I remember Mum going off to call my brother, to tell him about the bomb and she couldn’t wake him, just couldn’t.  So that was it, we didn’t know what to do.
MM:	Were many of your brothers living at home then?
MOR:	All my brothers, well, Bert now would have been in Monkstown, but all my other brothers, yes, four brothers were at home.  It was very frightening, yes.
MM:	Were you like a lot of other people, going to see the damage the next day.
MOR:	Oh definitely.  My brother that was asleep, when he got up and Mam told him what had happened, he got up on his bike and he went off.  And he said there was a huge crater, just on the far side of the canal, on the canal, he said, a huge big hole in the wall, with the houses all gone.  There was a row of houses there, a row of shops, there were good shops there – a jewellers and all – but one family was completely wiped out.  I remember there was one shop called the Red Star, and Mammy would [pause] we used to walk into town every Saturday and we’d buy something in the Red Star and it was bombed.  Then there was another bomb fell over near O’Connell’s School, between the orphanage and O’Connell’s School and the funny thing about it is that there wasn’t a pane of glass broken in the windows of the orphanage or the church.  No glass was broke, like, it was a miracle that no glass was broken either in the church or the orphanage.
MM:	Was there a lasting effect from that?
MOR:	There was, like we were always afraid going to bed, wondering were we going to be bombed.  Then the rumours went round that the Germans bombed us because we were taking refugees from Belfast and they were trying to get the railway line to keep the refugees from coming from Belfast, you see.  And another story was that they just dumped the bombs into the sea but they made a mistake.  It was hard to know what was true and what wasn’t true; we’ll never know.
MM:	What about school?  Presumably you were at school while all this was going on?
MOR:	I was at school, yes.
MM:	Did the war have any effect on your schooling?
MOR:	No, no.  The only thing is that it came in that we got our free schoolbooks.  We had to take good care of them, you couldn’t take them home at the end of the year, they had to be left for the class coming behind us, like the third years would give them to the next third year people coming on.  We weren’t able to write on them or anything else.
MM:	That was a new scheme, was it?
MOR:	That was a new scheme then.  When you went to school, all the books were put on your desk, and you sat down and what you wanted was there.  But you had to keep them clean, if you soiled them in any way; your parents had to pay for them.
MM:	What about school? Was it an all girls’ school?
MOR:	When I went to school first it was boys and girls, in babies, infants and senior infants.  Then you went into the girls’ school.  It was upstairs and the boys’ school was downstairs.  When you went from first school to primary school, it was only girls.  
MM:	What subjects were taught?
MOR:	Oh, it was English, Irish, Arithmetic, History and Religion, Sewing – that was our curriculum.  We did sewing every week, and we did knitting every week.
MM:	What about secondary school?  Did you go to that?
MOR:	I went to secondary school but I didn’t stay too long.  When my Granny died my mother had to go down to look after her [pause] it was my grandfather died and Mammy had to go down to mind her.  I was taken from Dublin down to a secondary school in Castleblayney, then I didn’t go back to secondary school, and I went to a technical school, where I did some more sewing, and cooking.  One thing in life I would love to have done and that was to be a chef.  I’d love to have been a chef but at that time, girls couldn’t do it.
MM:	Was there actually a bar on women doing it or was it just that it wasn’t something that was encouraged?
MOR:	It just wasn’t the thing, women always [pause] the thing about girls were, they didn’t get the education that boys got because they were supposed to end up at the kitchen sink, as the saying goes and why waste money educating them if they’re going to do that.
MM:	And would you have ever discussed it with your parents, that you might be a professional chef?
MOR:	No, I often said it but nothing came of it, you know.  And then I left school then, and I got a job in the Sweeps office, just a temporary job, just called in a few times a year.  Then I left that in 1953, that was it.
MM:	During the war years, how old were your brothers?
MOR:	The older brother would be, in 1939, he would have been sixteen, I think, no, he’d have been eighteen at the time the war started.  Then the next one was sixteen, or maybe seventeen and then Henry would have been fourteen.  There was only about two years between us, and then there was a year and a half then between myself and the next and Louie would have been about seven.
MM:	Did they go to secondary school?
MOR:	They went to secondary school, they all went to secondary school.  Nicholas went into a trade, he became a mechanic in Broadstone, and he was going to be a priest and he went to college to go on to the priesthood.  He was going to be a priest but he got sick with TB in the college and that left him that he didn’t go on for a few years.  So Hughie, that was the youngest brother, he went to Broadstone to take up a trade.
MM:	Really, what I’m trying to get at – a lot of the women I’ve spoken to said that it was assumed that education was for their brothers and there wasn’t any effort put in to their schooling.
MOR:	Yes, that was it.  
MM:	But they said that they didn’t feel there was much point in arguing about it, that it was just the way it was.
MOR:	Well, you see, you did what you were told to do and what they said, and you didn’t [pause] what they said had to be done and that was that.
MM:	The opportunities just weren’t there for women?
MOR:	Yes, like you daren’t back answer them or anything else.  It’s not like today, when children would give you cheek and this, that and the other.  You daren’t answer back; you were told to sit and be seen and not heard, that was what you were told to do, be seen and not heard.
MM:	And did the war change that at all?
MOR:	No, no, the war didn’t change that at all.  By the time, after the war anyway, it was beginning to be a bit better, and women could see that it wasn’t the right thing, you know, that there was something missing.  Why can’t we be [pause] I suppose they saw elsewhere, you see, women getting into jobs and that and thinking why can’t we get there, you know, their rights, as they say, their equality.  They’d want to be as equal as the men and they started the whole business then.  Getting jobs that men did, you see, women started doing, drivers, things like that.
MM:	What about [pause] to go back a few years to the war years, you were saying that the uncertainty about bombing was worrying.  Do you remember the blackouts?
MOR:	Oh yes, you daren’t have a light on.  You had to have black blinds, or black curtains, that would keep out the light.  And I remember all the lamp posts, they had kind of hoods on them to shine the light down onto the road, kind of in a straight line down on the road, and everything had hoods on them, even motor cars.  There weren’t many motor cars, but everything had to have little hoods to shine the light down on the road, but you daren’t have a light.  There’d be someone at the door saying you can see a sliver of light at the window and you’d have to make sure the curtain was folded not to see it.  And even like, some of the lamps like, if there was a lamp in our keyhole it wouldn’t be lit because they were trying to save electricity.  And the only lamp would be on the main road.  It was pretty dark, you know, if you went out at night.  There were very few people out at night, you know, like kids were in bed by eight o’clock.
MM:	What about things like the restriction on gas?
MOR:	Well that was another thing, you just had gas on for one or two hours in the morning to get your breakfast, and maybe about twelve o’clock to get the dinner, until maybe half one or so or two, and then an hour in the evening to get your tea and no way could you use it then.
MM:	How did your Mum manage with these restrictions?
MOR:	Well, she seemed [paused] she had a primus stove and she was able to get a bit of cooking done on that, that’d be it, and that way we’d be able to manage for the rest of the day.  If we wanted to make a cup of tea, you’d no electric kettle or anything like that, and you could use the stove to boil the kettle to make a cup of tea.  Or if the fire was lighting, which we would [pause] it was very hard to keep going because of England wouldn’t give us any coal because we wouldn’t let them use, give them the use of our ports.  It was wet turf that we had, you used to leave your turf standing on the range to dry before you burned it and logs were the same.
MM:	Did you get the turf delivered or did you have to collect it?
MOR:	It was brought around to us, like, a coalman used to call; like, he brought the turf instead and then you bought them from, you got them cheaper then if you bought them from someone in town.  Doherty’s was where Mam used to get hers and she would get turf from there, a few bags of turf and a few bags of logs.  And it would be wringing wet, that was it, you had to leave it on the range.  We’d all ranges and if the range was hot at all, you had your kettle on it that it would have been heated from when the gas was on in the morning and it wouldn’t take that long to boil.
MM:	I’ve been told the turf was full of fleas.
MOR:	Oh, don’t talk about the fleas, there were fleas everywhere, everywhere.
MM:	It seems incredible now.
MOR:	Oh it is, they laugh at you when you say – I do take a pound of butter out of the fridge and I cut off two ounces off it and I say that’s what I had during the war for one week.  I’d put that much on a slice of bread at the moment, you know, like that, I’d put that on my potatoes.  As for the sugar and tea, there was [pause] they gave us two ounces of tea per person, and then they took back an ounce and a half, this was later on, and the half pound of sugar.  That was three and a half ounces of tea, fourteen ounces of butter and the half pound of sugar, and that’s what you got.  You were given so much tea – as the song says, I’m not going to sing because I can’t sing [laughs]: Bless them all, bless them all, the long and the short and the tall.  Bless De Valera and Sean McEntee for giving us bread and two ounces of tea.  They took back a half, to give the rest of the staff.  We’re nearly gone loco from drinking shell cocoa. So cheer up now lads, bless them all [both laugh].
MM:	Yes, my mother was telling me that she saw shell cocoa in a garden centre recently and it was being sold as a weed killer.
MOR:	Yes, Mammy used to have it on the range, like in a pot, just the shells of the nuts and you’d a big pot and it’d be boiling and simmering away there goodoh and it was woeful.  You couldn’t even get the real cocoa.  
I remember then in 1945 I was in hospital, I had a gall bladder operation.  I had it done at a very young age, I was only seventeen when I had the gall bladder removed.  And the girl in the bed beside me had her appendix out the same day as I was operated on.  And she was from Belfast and people from Belfast came down to visit her.  What did they bring but six lemons and when her visitors had gone she gave me one lemon and she said ask the nurse to make a lemon drink because it’s great for thirst.  You see, you got the real ether at that time and I was very sick and dry.  You’d be dying for a great so she said, ask the nurse to make a lemon drink for you and it was, it did the drink, you’d just wet your lips, just every so often wet your lips and it was marvellous.  It was one of the best [pause] I’d never have thought of bringing lemons for a person in hospital but it was really good.
MM:	It’s a wonder they were able to bring them because they were even worse than us in regard to rationing.
MOR:	No, I don’t think so, you see, England was keeping Northern Ireland supplied with stuff.  We were able to get [pause] I remember another aunt coming over and wherever she got them, she got bananas, and she had a young son and she was stuffing the bananas into him and my little brother looking on and she didn’t give him that!
MM:	A lot of the women I’ve spoken to, from Belfast, they remember coming South to get round the rationing, it was more butter and some clothes, stockings and stuff like that, but the rules were very severe for rationing.
MOR:	Well, clothes were rationed here, like, we hadn’t nylon stockings here or silk stockings until after the war.  I remember when I started work in 1946, and I bought a pair of silk stockings for 17/11 in old money, and that was old money before decimals, and it was a half week’s wages.  I started work in an office in Fairview, an electrical place at a pound a week, and then when I went to the Sweeps Office, I got two guineas.
MM:	Did you get to spend your wages?
MOR:	No, I had to hand them up.  I got so much back for my bus fare every day and I had to hand up my wages.  
MM:	And did you save?
MOR:	I saved, well my mother saved for me, she saved my money for me.  If I wanted to buy a coat, she saved the money for me then and I’d take the amount and go into town and she’d come in with me.  I remember the first coat I bought in 1946 and it was a red coat, bought in Guineys for 4/19/11 and it had the ‘Utility’ mark on it.  It was skimpily made, it never fastened properly, there was always a vee at the bottom.  Material was scarce you see, and then I got another nice coat in 1949 in a place up in Mary Street, called Sydenhams, and that was 4/19/11 but a far nicer coat.  It was an olive green coat.  It had more material, like it closed over properly but the price of clothes fell sharply after the war with all the ‘Utility’ things but the material was skimpy.
MM:	Would you ever have seen remaking of old clothes?
MOR:	Well, my mother made all my clothes for me, from the skin out.  She made all the boys’ trousers and all, like that’s how handy she was.  Even if she was sitting down for a while, she’d be knitting socks for us all, and that was it.  She made all our clothes and any neighbours that wanted clothes, she made them too.  But this particular red coat, I remember turning it and getting it dyed because even after the war, money wasn’t plentiful.  Like that, people were very careful.  When I see the waste today, it makes me shudder to think of what we went through and they’re throwing out jeans with a hole in the knee of them; we used to patch things, the boys went to school with patches on their trousers.  You don’t see patches on anything.  The only thing I see patched now is jeans and the more patches on them today, the better, tattery.  You know, I never wore slacks as a child, I never, it was always dresses or skirts I had on me and when I see children in jeans nowadays, and they’re trailing on the ground, and wearing them [pause] I think it’s an awful waste.  That’s the fashion, Granny, that’s the fashion.  I say I know what I’d do if that was the fashion.
MM:	I think women especially had much harder lives then, with no machines to do things, like washing machines.
MOR:	They had, but no washing machines or anything.  That’s what I was trying to tell Rachel [Minnie’s grand-daughter], how many times a child had to be changed, I mean, they’re talking today about the waste, the rubbish piling up.  How many times a day had a child to be changed, I said, six times, at least six times.  And that would be six nappies that would be put into a bucket and left steeping.  They were washed the next day, but with all the other clothes, you did your washing on a Monday and you  ironed on Tuesday, and you were a bad housewife if you put washing out on Wednesday.  Of course, nappies had to go out every day but as regards the main, like sheets on the bed; we didn’t change our clothes every day, to start off with we hadn’t got them to put on.  What you put on Sunday morning came off on Saturday and another clean set went on on Sunday, and everybody was like that.
MM:	What about using the laundry service for big stuff, like bed linen?
MOR:	Yes, the Swastika used to do what they called the ‘bag wash’.  I don’t know whether, I forget what it was, whether it was a one shilling or half a crown, and they used to give you a huge big bag, and you’d put all your sheets and heavy stuff into that and they’d wash it for you, but you dried it yourself.  They would spin dry it for you and they brought it back to you and it was great to do that.  Like Mam used to have [pause] we’d come home on a Monday from school and you could always smell the washing before you saw it.  When you’d open the back door, before you’d open the back door, you’d know Mam would be washing because you could smell it, and the sweat would be pouring off her.
MM:	Would you have been expected to give her a hand?
MOR:	Oh yes.  I remember coming home from school and making bread, griddle bread.
MM:	Was that just you, or did your brothers do it as well?
MOR:	No, I had to do it.  They had to do their lessons, I had to do the bread. [Both laugh.]
MM:	That seems to have been common at the time, that the boys didn’t help with housework.
MOR:	Yes. Very seldom they helped; but they used to go for messages or anything like that.  I wasn’t made a skivvy or anything; it was just that I helped.  I took delight in cooking and I loved cooked.  Like, I wasn’t [pause] I didn’t have to do housework but I’d help.
MM:	It wasn’t just because you were the one girl, then?
MOR:	Oh no, no, it was just I suppose that Mam was training me to be a housewife and she’d tell me to make the bread.  I remember one time she had to go down to her mother, in the country, I think I was about fourteen, maybe sixteen this time, and she told me, you go into town, she says, and get a half stone of gooseberries and seven pounds of sugar and make gooseberry jam.  That was my first time to make gooseberry jam and I was sixteen.  She made all sorts of jam, strawberry – but I got instructed to go into town anyway and get a half stone of gooseberries and a half stone of sugar and make the jam.  Like, she always did very well by us, you know, taught us what she could.
We used to sing then, we used to sing at nighttime.  Dad would be away in the army and he wouldn’t be at home and we used to sing in the dark around the fire.  We’d have a singsong at nighttime.  Bert wouldn’t be here because he was away in college but the six of us anyway, that would be it.  I cry every time I hear ‘Slievenamon’ because that was her favourite.  [Interruption while a neighbour comes in.]
MM:	Was that quite common, for Irish boys to go to England for work?
MOR:	Well there was nothing here for them like; a lot of people went to England.  Even girls went to England, for nursing and all, in England and my aunt wanted to take me over to train me as a nurse but Mam wouldn’t let me go, why I don’t know.  She didn’t, she thought I wouldn’t be fit for it, somehow.  That was that but there was definitely no work here.
MM:	Would you have thought of doing nursing?
MOR:	I would have loved to have done nursing.  There was always one thing I wanted, I’d love to have been a chef, own a cake shop or go to nursing or do sewing and none of them.  I didn’t get doing any of them.  
MM:	I bet you got to do them all when you were bringing up your family.
MOR:	[Laughs] I got to do them all at the latter end, but that was it anyway.
MM:	Would you have been conscious in your teens that you would have fewer options maybe than your brothers?
MOR:	No, I wasn’t very conscious of it at that time, but later on in life I realised that they were getting a better education than I was.  Maybe it was that I didn’t want to go [pause] I liked school but I didn’t like the teacher I had in Marino.  She was cruel, very cruel.
MM:	Was this a lay teacher?
MOR:	A lay teacher and I remember one day [pause] now, you daren’t tell your mother you got slapped in school, or your father for that matter, you got slapped in school.
MM:	Was that because they’d assume you deserved it?
MOR:	Yes, you were bold and they would give you another clatter for misbehaving in school.  Like, you were warned that you were to behave in class.  So anyway, the teacher told us to sit down and fold our arms and whatever she was doing, I don’t know what she was doing, and we sat down and unconsciously I started doing this [twirling a lock of hair around her finger], curling my hair around my finger.  And she called me up and said I told you to sit down and fold your arms and she got my four fingers in her hand and came down on my fingers with the side of a ruler.  I must have got about twenty slaps and my fingers were sore and I was crying when I went home and I was terrified to go home because my mother would ask me what I was crying for, what did I do.  So I told Mam what happened and she was down the next day to Marino, had the head nun and the teacher out in the corridor and I was taken out of that school and brought down to Fairview the next day.  She said she wouldn’t have that, that was uncalled for but that was what went on in the schools.
MM:	It’s really hard to think about children being treated like that but a lot of people didn’t seeing anything wrong with it.
MOR:	Oh, it was very hard, very hard but the world has changed an awful lot.
MM:	When you were growing up and finishing going to school, how did that fit in with your family life, which was obviously very happy? Did you have a social life outside the home?
MOR:	I had a good family life, but the only thing is I had to be in early.  There was no going out until half twelve at night or not coming home until the morning.  I had to be in the house before half nine and that was up until I was married.  Then if I was going to the pictures I got to eleven o’clock but after that I wouldn’t be let out and that was just it.
MM:	What about going out with boys, for instance how did you meet your husband?
MOR:	Oh yes, well, he happened to come [pause] Mam took in – there was no boys at home then, there was only myself and Dad was away and Mam took in two lodgers, two boarders and it was one of them that I married.  The minute I saw him I said that’s it [laughs].  So it was easy enough, she knew I was with him and we came back to the house together.  We didn’t have much entertainment unless some aunt or somebody came over from England and we’d have a bit of a party for them, you know, we’d have a singsong.  I remember one time we’d a party out on the street, it must have been after my brother’s ordination in 1949.  You see, we lived in a circle, what they called ‘keyholes’ in Donnycarney.  It was a circle with twelve houses in it and I remember being out on the road, dancing and singing and all, doing the hokey pokey and my aunts from England and all were out in the keyhole, doing dancing.  So it must have been that time when my brother was ordained.  That’s the only time I can remember that the aunts were there like that, with the whole street out.
MM:	Was the church much of an influence on your life, growing up?
MOR:	The church was an influence.  I remember being, as a child, now this was 1939, early in 1939, I might have been only ten at the time, no, I would have been eleven and my uncle died and my Mam took me to Castleblayney for the funeral.  Mammy took me then and she left the others at home with my Dad, she took me with her and the aunts and all came home from England.  And I remember it was snowing this day and my granny only had a range that time, she used to do all her cooking on the range, and she had the remains of a pot of stew and she says to me Good Friday or no Good Friday, get up in your grandmother’s chair and eat that.  I never thought of it being Good Friday but it had a chicken’s heart in it and being the good, obedient little girl that I was taught to be, I ate everything on the plate.  But I knew I had to go to Confession for eating meat.  So the next Saturday, I went to Confession and I told the priest what I had done.  Well, he made a show of me.  He screamed at me and everybody in the church knew what I had done and ever since, I’ve hated going to Confession.
MM:	That was a very out of proportion reaction, wasn’t it?
MOR:	It was.  I put feel my face like a beetroot in the church.  I could see them all looking at me in the church when I came out of the Confession box.  They all knew what I had done.  You know that our Lord died for you on Good Friday and you turn around and you eat meat on it at the top of his voice.  It left me that afraid.  Then another time, I was married and had two children and my sister-in-law was getting married, this was in 1957, July 1957 she was getting married.  And we went to her wedding and Phil [Minnie’s husband], being the only fellow with a motorcar at the time, had to drive every Tom, Dick, and Harry to the church.  He’d drop one to the church and then he’d go off to collect somebody else.  And I had Bertie and he was only two or three, and I had him sitting on one side of me and Rose sitting on the other.  Well, Mass had started anyway and the door opened and Bert looked around to see who was coming in and he said Daddy is here [whispering] and that’s the way he said it.  And the priest stopped the Mass and told me to take the children out of the church.  I said they’re not bold but he wouldn’t go ahead with the ceremony unless I took them out.  So I had to go out with my two children and I swore I would never, ever set foot in a Catholic church again.  And to make matters worse, there was a Protestant man waiting for my sister, my other sister, and it was only spilling out of the heavens this day, the 17th July, and he was in the car and I had to tell him that I’d had to leave the church with the children.  So, you see kids nowadays and they’re running wild round the church.
MM:	There were a lot of problems because the priests had so much power and not all of them knew how to handle it.
MOR:	No, they were made gods of, they were made gods of, and that was that.  If they were coming to the house and you got wind of it, you had to clean the house spic and span before they’d come.  You’d nearly put the red carpet out for them.
MM:	And they didn’t have much idea of what women had to deal with?
MOR:	No, and they’d be telling you have children, have children, have children.  The whole Catholic religion has gone haywire but I think Confession should be done away with, you shouldn’t have to tell your sins to somebody else, tell them straight to God.  You’re sorry, the rest doesn’t matter.
MM:	One of the women I’ve interviewed, she had six children because she believed she had to, even though she was very poor, but before she was married, she’d gone out with a Protestant man whom she loved but she stopped because her friends told her it would be against her religion to stay with him and they wouldn’t be able to get married.
MOR:	I remember one Protestant girl getting married to a Catholic boy in Donnycarney and his family shunned him because he became Catholic and it was a holy terror.  Now it can happen nowadays, the Catholic religion has changed so much since I was a child.  You daren’t go to Holy Communion if you’d eat since the night before but that’s all gone.
MM:	Would you generally feel that improved material conditions have contributed to the change?
MOR:	Oh it is, definitely, people are better off, but there’s still an awful lot of waste.  Like, children have too many toys, no matter what a child wants today, it gets it, no matter what debt the parents go into to buy it.  They go into debt to buy it and all the children know what they’re getting for Christmas.  Christmas today for children is not the same as it was for our kids.  
MM:	Most kids have a list.
MOR:	No, my kids never gave me a list, all I’d hear would be I’d love to get this and I’d love to get that, I hope to get this and I hope to get that but they never got anything they hoped for, but as Rose says, we always enjoyed what we got.  It was really a surprise what they got, you know like, it wouldn’t be a doll, or it wouldn’t be [pause] it would be something else out of the ordinary that they would never dream of but they enjoyed what they got.  I think it spoils the Christmas nowadays when kids know exactly what they’re getting.  
MM:	I know that most of the women I’ve spoken to would share your opinion and they all feel that while times during the war were hard, it did teach them how to manage money and appreciate the value of what they got.
MOR:	Like, I got a few sheets from my mother’s house and when I used them, they were patched and I’m not ashamed to hang them out on the line today because that reminds me of the war years.  Like, you turned your sheets from centre to outside, you put the one side, you split your sheet down the middle, and you sewed the two sides together.  Double sheets and then you could use them on a single bed because you see what would be worn would be gone off them.  You see, that’s how [pause].
MM:	And would you done this, you know, if you were doing that kind of thing would that have been on a sewing machine or by hand?
MOR:	On the sewing machine, yes.  That was the first piece of furniture I bought for my house, nearly had a row with my husband.  I had no furniture coming to this house.  We had the bare boards and I had a bed, a pram and a cot, when I moved in here in November of 1956, and I met a women the following day, she was a neighbour of mine in Donnycarney, she moved to Foxfield and she met me outside.  Minnie she says you’ve moved into a new house, I’m selling up, and moving to England, she says, I’ll give you first choice of my furniture.  Says I, Mrs. Walsh, says I, there’s one thing I want from you, says I, and that’s your sewing machine because I knew it was never used.  It was her neighbour in Donnycarney got it as a wedding present from her father and she never used it and she gave it to this woman.
MM:	It’s not electrical?
MOR:	No, it’s not electrical, it’s a manual with a foot pedal, so that was my first, and I offered her £10 for it.  All I had in the post office that time was £27.  My husband was a taxi driver but that was in case anything happened the car, you know, that I wanted ready money and I had to come home and tell him.  I bought it on the spur of the moment without telling him and I came home and he said to me what have you done, what in God’s name do you want a sewing machine for.  It wasn’t as polite as that [laughs] but I said I’ll make the children’s clothes.  You will in your behind, it’ll sit there and be doing nothing.  So I couldn’t go back on my word to the woman anyway but I met her again and she says to me if you give me another £10 I’ll give you the contents of my sitting room and my dining room so I came back and I told him and he said well, that’s a bit better.  [Both laugh.] Well, whether her husband said I was giving too much for the machine or not, I don’t know, because I remember my own mother saying she’d paid £7 for a sewing machine.
MM:	Well, they were always expensive.
MOR:	They were, yes.
MM:	So your mother then would have had a sewing machine?
MOR:	Mammy had a sewing machine, sure Mam made all my clothes and she made the boys’ clothes as well.  She sewed for the neighbours as well.
MM:	Did she get paid by the neighbours?
MOR:	Well, she’d get a few shillings, like, it would be pennies at that time, it wouldn’t be an awful lot, not like nowadays.  Sure, I did sewing too for the neighbours; anybody wanted anything made I made for them.  You see, I’d been a machinist you see, but anyway that was it, but I only got it overhauled there recently and it cost me £32 so it only cost me £32 for all those years.
MM:	Well, if you think of the rate of inflation? [Both laugh.]
MOR:	No, well what we did, we used to get a bit of white bread in the North.  Henry used to go to cousins in Newry and he used to go on his bike, cycle up from Dublin, yes, and he had people then in Gormanstown, you see, that he would stay.  He’d cycle to Gormanstown then stay the night and go up to Newry and then come back to Gormanstown and break his journey.  But he’d always bring back two white loaves and they were a treat.  They were really a treat.
MM:	So it wasn’t, the bread you were getting wasn’t like Irish brown bread now?
MOR:	Oh no, not like that at all.  I don’t know what it was, it was grey.  The flour was never the same.  I remember baking bread and it was snow white with a lovely brown crust on it.  Now as regards today, it’s a yellowy colour, a creamy colour.
MM:	It might be something to do with all the preservatives that are put in it?
MOR:	It might be, and the rashers are not the same today.
MM:	What about things like vegetables?
MOR:	Well Mum had a plot during the war, now, over where what we call the new Donnycarney is now, over there between the Malahide Road and Killester.  She had a plot there, just at that, with a little river running behind it and it was ten shillings [pause] it was five shillings a year, I think, for the plot.  It was – they let it out and it was just that she had such a small plot that she got it at a smaller price but she grew everything in it.  She did it all herself, on top of everything.  Well, we’d all go over and help her, you know, I remember her doing the potatoes, and cabbage, and runner beans.  But she took pride in doing it because everybody had – were doing it, and one tried to be better than the other, with the rows of beetroot and everything.  She’d everything in it.
MM:	And what about your Dad?  Was he living in army barracks?
MOR:	No, he’d be home every weekend.  That was the way it was, he was away most of the time.  I don’t know what, before the [pause] he used to be in the Portobello Barracks and I remember him going off every morning, washing and shaving and polishing his buckles and everything else and his boots and going off to Portobello.  But that was long before the war.
MM:	So he’d be home at night, then?
MOR:	He’d be home every night and then we had the parties up in the barracks at Christmas, Christmas parties for the soldiers’ children, and we’d go to them.
MM:	It was a tough life for your mother.
MOR:	It was a tough life for Mam, yes.  
MM:	People complain about the pace of life now, but it seems like it was pretty hectic then, particularly for women.
MOR:	Oh, it’s not now, people don’t have time to say hello to you today, you know like.  No matter when you go into a person’s house, especially in the country, the kettle was always singing and before you’d know where you’d be there’d be a pot of tea made, there’d be eggs put on, baked bread and everything else on the table, sit over, you know, like, unexpected.  Nowadays, you go into houses and you’re not even offered a cup of tea, it’s not the same at all.  Everybody is rushing, rushing, rushing.  They haven’t time to do this and they haven’t time to do that and when somebody says that to me, I always say when God made time, he made plenty of it, so take your time.
MM:	[Laughs] I’m going to wind it up on that wise note.  Thank you very much.


Minnie, Dublin. Interview: 5th July 2002.

MOR1

