Nancy, Dublin. Interview: 9th October 2003.

NO’B:	My name is Nancy O’B.
MM:	You were saying that you wanted to be a nurse and that this was something of a family tradition.
NO’B:	In one sense, yes.  I was in secondary school in Carysfort Park in Blackrock and after I did the Inter. Cert., they weren’t going to have a class for the Leaving Cert., for the simple reason that enough of us weren’t going back to continue.  We went back but there weren’t sufficient numbers.  Then it was decided that because I couldn’t go to another secondary school, not having languages or other things I should have done – I did commerce and other such subjects at school – I went to a commercial college, Miss Regan’s Commercial College.  
MM:	Where was that?
NO’B:	In O’Connell Street.  Two sisters set up that school and they’d been there for years.  
MM:	And when you went there, were you intending to go into the world of commerce?
NO’B:	Well, my mother thought I should have a secretarial background and then try for civil service exams and so on.
MM:	Did the college prepare you specifically for the civil service exams?
NO’B:	That was included in it, but for any job in the secretarial world – we did shorthand, typewriting, business methods, and English [laughs] we had to improve our English.  And so on, those kind of subjects, we had Irish there as well, in the business college.  But I think after the first year, when I went back then for the second year, I suddenly thought one day, no way am I going to spend my life hitting a typewriter and writing shorthand, so what should I do?  I suddenly said, I’ll go nursing, just like that.
MM:	And it wasn’t anything you’d ever thought about, you know, playing nursing as a child?
NO’B:	Well, at that time I’d read a lot of novels, you know Annie M. P. Smithson and that, where there was a nursing background so I suppose it was a bit glamorous.  But it was always at the back of my mind that there was something [pause] and I was encouraged by a friend of the family who had actually trained with my aunt in England and she encouraged me then, once I had made the decision that I should really do it.
MM:	And how did your parents react to that?
NO’B:	Well, my mother was absolutely appalled when I went home and said that I wasn’t going back, nobody had ever said anything like that in our house before, and she said well I’ll have to speak to your father.  You’d think my father was somewhere else, the way she said it, but she came good, she came back when she had had the discussion with my father.  She came back and she said he said you can go and do the nursing and you can go to England, if you want, which I thought was very good of her. 
MM:	I must say that it sounds unusual, by modern standards, that the discussion would have been had without your presence.
NO’B:	Well, it wasn’t a matter of discussing it without me, I mean, it was about whether they would permit me to go, I don’t think I came into the discussion, that part of it.  My mother didn’t say I couldn’t do it but she was so flabbergasted that I think her way out for the time being was to say well, I’ll have to talk to your father. 
MM:	What about the funding?
NO’B:	Well, there was no funding required.
MM:	But even the money for setting you up, travel and that sort of thing?
NO’B:	Well, the fare to England in those days was very little, you just got the boat and that wasn’t a problem, that wasn’t a problem at all.
MM:	So how did you go about applying?
NO’B:	Again, Miss Regan.  She suggested that I apply to Sellyoak Hospital in Birmingham but my mother, of course, thought I should go to a nuns’ hospital so I applied to one London hospital and there was no answer from it.  I applied to another and they said yes, everything was approved, but I’d better wait until the end of the war.  But that wasn’t for me so I went into Miss Regan and I said what was the name of that hospital and she gave me the name and address.  I applied there and I was accepted.
MM:	And this was in Birmingham?
NO’B:	In Birmingham, in 1943.
MM:	And what were the conditions like there?
NO’B:	Well, actually, I never heard a bomb fall in Birmingham.  The only bomb I heard during the war was the one that fell on North Strand.  It had been bombed pretty badly before I got there, but most of the bombing at that stage was down in the London area and the south, the doodlebugs and that sort of thing.  Coventry was flattened and Birmingham had been badly damaged also.
MM:	So how did your mother react when you were obviously quite determined to go?
NO’B:  Well, there was no [pause] my mother was very good like that [pause] once it was decided, that was it.
MM:	So how did you go about getting ready?
NO’B:	Well, I packed my bags and went by boat to Holyhead.  We had to wear our life jackets all the way over, because of the possibility of being bombed from underneath and then by train.  Well, I just followed my nose, I suppose.  I’d been told I had to change trains at Crewe so I went down, and of course, I missed the first train so I was late getting into Birmingham where a cousin of mine had come from Coventry to meet me and to take me to Sellyoak but she had asked a friend of hers, because she had been in school at Birmingham so she had friends there.  So she met me and put me in a taxi at Birmingham and sent me out to Sellyoak.
MM:	So you weren’t completely alone?
NO’B:	No, there was no problem there.
MM:  It must have been fairly daunting, nevertheless.
NO’B:	 No, I don’t remember that.
MM:	How old were you?
NO’B:	Eighteen and a half.  But it was like a sort of [pause] I don’t know, I don’t remember any problems about it.
MM:	I know one or two people I’ve spoken to who went away had been at boarding school and felt it was very good preparation, but you hadn’t that experience?
NO’B:	No, certainly not.  With eleven children, there would have been nothing like boarding school [laughs].
MM:	When you got there, what sort of regime were you introduced to?
NO’B:	Well, first of all, when I landed, of course, the others had all been [pause] the new ones starting had already been sort of dealt with, but one of the senior nurses had been assigned to take me and go over what was done.  How to wear your uniform, make up your cap and she was very good.  She was very friendly and very good.  So I went up to my room – I was sharing it with another Irish nurse and she was from Dun Laoghaire.  We had not been told that we were both going at the same time, by the hospital.  It would have made things easier but I do remember asking her had she unpacked, and she said oh no, that’s too much like staying.  So she just stayed the three months and she did actually [pause] I don’t know what happened to her after that.
MM:	You don’t know why she didn’t stay?
NO’B:	I don’t know, I don’t know what happened to her at all.  
MM:	She just stayed the three months.  So what was it?  Three months that you [pause]?
NO’B:	Well, we had three months of what we called a probationary period and up to that, you didn’t have to sign a contract to remain with the school until the end of the three months and then we were given an exam. Then you could choose to go or not, as you wished, and she chose to go.
MM:	And during that three months, would it have been all academic work?
NO’B:	No, in those days you went on the wards.  The first day we were shown around and brought around the wards and actually, on the afternoon of the first day, we were on the wards.  Now, I don’t mean that we were doing things but we were there with the staff.  You were always with somebody who was senior, of course, you never did anything on your own for quite a while.  For me, that was the best way of learning, by doing the practical part and the theoretical part.  Not just doing theory and then the practical work.  I was very glad that that’s the way they did it because when you were getting your lectures later on, you could relate it to the cases you met on the ward.
MM:	Yes, of course.  But I presume you weren’t actually allowed to do anything to the patients?
NO’B:	You were but you were doing it with somebody.  Like, if you were making a bed you were doing it with somebody senior and they were teaching you.  All the time, the one above you was teaching you. 
MM:	Was it a fairly heavy regime in the sense of long hours?
NO’B:	Well, we were on duty at seven o’clock in the morning and we had two hours off during the day, except for one day when you could finish at six fifteen we finished at eight thirty at night and one day off in the week.
MM:	I know that one of the women I’ve interviewed, who did her training here in Dublin in the Adelaide, she said it was a very strict regime and that really just about every hour or the day was accounted for.
NO’B:	Well, you see, when you were on duty you were accounted for but when you were off duty you were free to do whatever you’d want.
MM:	Well, they found that the ward sister had kind of life or death power over whether they got any time off.  
NO’B:	No, you were completely free.  
MM:	Where were you living?  Was it in the nurse’s home?
NO’B:	In the nurse’s hostel, yes, which was across the road from the hospital actually, it wasn’t in the hospital complex.  
MM:	And were there mainly English girls there?
NO’B:	Well, there were a lot of Irish, a lot of Irish girls there and Welsh, various, you know, there was a mixture.
MM:	And would those girls have been there for the same reason, that it was too expensive to train here?
NO’B:	I don’t know, it wasn’t discussed at all.
MM:	Was that because you didn’t mix much or because it just didn’t arise?
NO’B:	No, it just didn’t enter our heads.  We were here and that was that, why we were here didn’t come into the equation at all.  
MM:	It’s probably pretty hard to remember every conversation sixty years later.
NO’B:	No [laughs] but I don’t think it dawned on anybody to think why.
MM:	What about the interaction with the patients?  Were they conscious of you being Irish and was there any difference because of that?
NO’B:	There was no difference.  I never, ever met any problem about being Irish and with a name like O’Brien, you weren’t anything but.  But my accent was not, it wasn’t Irish as such because the sister tutor on the first day, when we were going back – she’d taken us up to the hospital to introduce us and then took us over to the classroom to give us some basic information – and she said where did I get my name from and I thought she meant Nancy, because I thought it’s not Eileen or Kathleen or [pause] but I thought that’s what she’s referring to.  And she said, no, the name O’Brien and I said, well I’m Irish and she said how long have you been here and I said well I came yesterday [laughs].  But it was because a lot of the girls were from the west of Ireland or the south of Ireland or even some from the north of Ireland and the Welsh girls all had accents and the Scots girls had accents but my accent didn’t fit in anywhere for her, whereas people who came from Dublin knew, if I met them anywhere in the world, they’d say you’re from Dublin.  But for the English people, no, they associated being Irish more with the Galway, the west accents or the south accents.  
MM:	Again, trying to establish any comparison with the Irish training, the woman I’ve spoken to said it was very hierarchical, that the women who were training tended to lord it over the newer intake, not bullying necessarily, but the person who was senior would not consciously help the junior and remember what it was like when they came in, but that it seemed that the little bit of power they got went to their heads.  
NO’B:	No, that wouldn’t be my experience.  You might get one person who was in a little bit of a bad mad or something, but generally they were very helpful.  Everyone was helpful to the new ones coming back because you’d had your say, you didn’t have to prove [pause] because you got one stripe when you first started and when you finished your first year you got a second stripe and then so on you got a third stripe.  So everybody knew who was who, even the patients would know that this one was senior to the other one, but not because they were bullied or anything like that.  You might find somebody who was a bit off, but generally speaking, no.
MM:	And how did you find relations with the ancillary staff, for instance the clerical or the cleaning staff?
NO’B:	Well, you see, you didn’t have those sort of things in the hospital.  They were – the ancillary staff wouldn’t be on the wards, we wouldn’t have any direct [pause] except when we were going for our salary or something like that [laughs].  Generally speaking, we wouldn’t, although there was one man who was a very nice man, one man who used to look after us very well and another man who would come up to talk to patients.  And then we would have what was called the Almoner, like she would be coming up to see patients but we wouldn’t have so much to do with each other.  We’d speak to each other, all right, but no.
MM:	The other lady told me that the hospital porters had a huge influence because if they liked you they could be extremely helpful, but that they knew so much, they’d picked up so much medical knowledge that sometimes they’d help them out when they were clearly at a loss.  
NO’B:	Well, we only had two porters so far as I can remember [pause] those were the theatre porters, there were more than that.  They were all very helpful, they would be helpful and if they saw you were doing something, that you were going to get yourself in to a bit of trouble; they would help rather than the other way round.  They would more look after you than be against you.
MM:	How did it work – were you paid from the beginning?
NO’B:	We were paid from the beginning.  Well, it would be more or less pocket money because you see, we had three meals a day, we’d full board and lodging.  You know, bedding, the whole lot, plus our education, plus everything else.  I think it was about £3 something a month that I got, when I first started, which would have been a lot, especially in comparison that I didn’t have anything to buy.  Clothes or stockings, whatever you went over with, would have lasted you at least a year before you would be replacing things so that really your stockings and your pens and your pencils and your books – you did have to buy your books, textbooks and things.  But they were much cheaper then in comparison to today, when you think of books today [laughs] so that the [pause] we were well off really.  In a sense, we were better off with the City of Birmingham than many of the nurses who were training in other hospitals such as the voluntary hospitals, or even others.  The City of Birmingham was very good but that was just chance because there were no [pause].
MM:	That was a public hospital?
NO’B:	There were no [pause] we didn’t call them private hospitals.  The nearest would have been the voluntary hospitals but they took in patients other than [pause] private patients per se, whereas we didn’t take private patients.  Not at all, no.  But when the Rushcliffe rate of salaries came in, because some of the nurses were getting very little, they brought it up to, actually not quite what we were getting at that time, but because we were all getting the higher rate, we continued on it.  Whereas those coming in after me, in fact about three months later, they were getting according to the Rushcliffe scale.  So we were [laughs] I was well off in comparison.
MM:	How did the rationing situation affect you?
NO’B:	It didn’t because, you see, the hospital took your ration card.  If you were going on holiday, say, somewhere in England or say someone from England was going home, they got their ration books to take home with them for the month or whatever it was.  But the hospital, we were not short of food, you understand, because all the patients handed in their ration books when they were admitted but some patients wouldn’t be eating or would be eating very little so on the whole – the type of food – but we were never hungry.  And also, the people I knew who were living in homes, like, I had friends outside, they seemed to manage all right.  People learned how to get this and that and how to make up for things.  They weren’t hungry as you had in Europe, in places like Holland or Denmark, like that.  We didn’t have that but I didn’t [pause] some people might have felt they were badly off but I didn’t.
MM:	Were you sent parcels from home?
NO’B:	No.
MM:	I know people who had [pause] not quite a black market trade but certainly a barter system with hams and things that were coming from home and probably not in the greatest condition by the time they arrived but they were swapping them for stockings or such things.
NO’B:	No, I never heard of anything like that.  I don’t remember any of my Irish colleagues doing it either.
MM:	When you were there, did you feel in any sense conscious of being Irish or were you just a nurse and it didn’t matter where you were from?
NO’B:	I think that’s how it was, yes.
MM:	Was there any anti-Irish feeling, because of neutrality?
NO’B:	Well, you see, people could make trouble for themselves by trying to be Irish, in a sense.  For instance, we couldn’t go to Mass every Sunday so that what happened was Sunday morning you got to go to Mass once in three weeks, when you were junior, every three weeks because one Sunday morning off, one Sunday afternoon off and Sunday evening off.  We had to take it in turns because somebody has to be in the hospital.  But they felt that they should go to Mass every Sunday.  They’d go to the Matron, and she said I have quite a number of staff here who feel they should go to church on a Sunday morning.  She said I can’t possibly let them all off.  These would be people who were Church of England or whatever.  But they would, they would make trouble for themselves by feeling that they were against the Irish, which was not true.
MM:	It was just the practicalities of the situation?
NO’B:	Yes, yes. You can’t close the hospital [laughs].
MM:	As you moved up through the system, how many years did you actually take to complete your initial training?
NO’B:	Three and a half years for the [pause] to become a registered nurse.
MM:	And what did this mean in terms of your conditions?
NO’B:	Well, it didn’t mean very much to me because I went on to do midwifery.  I went down to London, which was in 1947, down to North Middlesex Hospital in London.  Four of us went together and we did six months.  Of course, it was done in two parts – part one and part two – and then at the end of the first part, I thought, oh my goodness, I’m not going on to the rest of it.  The other three went on and I came back to Ireland and went to the Cork Street Fever Hospital.  I did training in communicable diseases.
MM:	What was it about midwifery that you decided you didn’t like it?
NO’B:	I don’t [pause] I didn’t really get the hang of it, really, because I suppose there were too many of us at it.  Then my aunt came home from Scotland once, and she said to me, I knew you’d never finish your midwifery.  Nobody in this family ever did it [laughs].  So, what did my aunt do?  Six months later she went back and did her midwifery, the second part [laughs].  
MM:	So when you came back to Cork Street, did you find there was a difference in the way the hospital was run?
NO’B:	Oh a huge difference, I couldn’t believe it, I couldn’t believe how difficult it was.  Nor could some other girls who were with me, who had trained in England, who had worked in England.  The conditions were terrible.
MM:	What were the conditions like?
NO’B:	Absolutely appalling.  You know, the facilities for the children and the rest of it [pause] but I don’t know what other hospitals in Ireland were like because I didn’t know them and I couldn’t compare at all.
MM:	In relation to your own position as a fully qualified nurse, were you treated with the same respect as you had been in England?
NO’B:  Well, we were used, well, the fact that we had got our S.R.N. but the funny thing was that we were supposed to be in by ten o’clock at night, the same as those students who didn’t have their qualifications, so it was very funny.
MM:	Who was running the hospital, was it nuns?
NO’B:	No, it would have been the public health department, administrators, I suppose.  From the Department of Health, I don’t know, it was just called the House of Health and Recovery from Fever Hospital.  It had been there for donkey’s years.  It was in very bad shape and the Medical Superintendent of the hospital, he said [pause] you know, there was a diagram in the front hall of the new [pause] a model of the new hospital.  And he said that do you see that laundry down there, and all that steam going to waste up the chimney there, that should be piped up into the hospital for poor children with the croup and what have you.  But he said, I’ll never live to see that.  But they started building soon after I left, out at Cherry Orchard.  The poor man had a heart attack so he didn’t get to see it.
MM:	Right, so the hospital was transferred.
NO’B:	Yes,
MM:	Was that one of the T.B. hospitals?
NO’B:	No.  Well, we had meningitis patients, T.B. meningitis patients, but we didn’t have pulmonary tuberculosis patients.  They built Crooksling, I think it was, and you had Peamount and you had St. Mary’s in the Park, I don’t know when that opened.  That was originally T.B.
MM:	In terms of pay, how did that compare to England?  Was it lower?
NO’B:	It was lower, much lower here.  Of course, again, we were being paid as students, not full registered nurses, for the first year here.  
MM:	Was that because you’d qualified in England?
NO’B:	No, because we were getting our training.  We weren’t as good to them as say a nurse who had completed her training.  So from that point, yes.
MM:	When you came home, were you living in a nurse’s hostel?
NO’B:	Yes.  Right up beside Cork Street hospital, there was a graveyard at the side of it.  I’ve forgotten now what the house was but I lived in the nurse’s home there.  
MM:	You’d have been in your mid-twenties by this stage?  How did that affect you?  I mean, my daughter is twenty-six and she would find it very difficult to live in those sort of regimented conditions.  Did that matter to you?
NO’B:	Not at all. You were working and on your day off, you were out, you’d do what you liked. 
MM:	What about having to be in by ten o’clock?
NO’B:	Well, that was a bit trying but you know, you got around it, you managed [laughs].
MM:	The Matron in the Adelaide used to vet the boyfriends of people who were invited to dances there.  Did anything like that go on?
NO’B:	No, well, we didn’t have dances there.  The only thing, there was one I remember during my year, I did a year and then some exam and then I stayed on for a few months while I decided what I was going to do next, and that was a temporary not as a full [pause].  But the only dance was one that was held in the Gresham Hotel, I think, it would have been an annual dance, you know.  There were the senior staff there and I suppose they were looking around, but you weren’t bothered [laughs].  
MM:	Were there differences [pause] I know there were differences in conditions but would there be differences in the techniques that were used in Cork Street and the ones in Sellyoak?
NO’B:	Not a lot, no.  Not a great deal of difference, but then again, the techniques were slightly different because of the kind of nursing we were doing and the people we were dealing with.  The vast majority were children and mostly from the slums, and they were the best patients I ever had.  When they were well they were very well and when they were sick, they were very sick.  But when they were getting better, they were an entertainment [laughs].
MM:	My mother got diphtheria when she was a young child and she was quarantined for two months during which she was not allowed see her family.
NO’B:	Nobody was allowed in the hospital, there were no visitors at all.  
MM:	It must have made children quite distressed?
NO’B:	Not at all.  They came from [pause] if you saw some of the houses, because they were all infectious diseases, or reputed to be infectious diseases, we had to go out and collect them in our own ambulance from Cork Street and there we had two drivers who also were a pantomime [laughs].  So we had to go out and bring them in and you couldn’t even bring in their clothes because you might [pause] so you had to wrap them in a blanket and bring them in so that nothing came in.
MM:	So you saw how bad the slums were?
NO’B:	You might have to mind a hole on the stairs, sometimes, going up the stairs in a tenement.
MM:	One of my interviewees was a Medical Almoner in the Rotunda and she told me one story where she had been visiting a patient in her home and she had twenty children and like that, she’d had to skip over the holes in the stairs to get up to the top of the house.
NO’B:	And you had to have a torch with you.  But the funny thing was, you’d come along at night and there’d be nobody there and when you came down if you could open the door of the ambulance they’d all appear from God knows where, just to see who it was that was being taken away [laughs].  No, do you see on our children’s ward in Sellyoak there were no visitors allowed for the simple reason that the children were more upset when the visitors went.  And we also had to think that if someone comes to see the child and a day or two later the child develops measles, then the ward has to close and they are all in quarantine.  Children being admitted were admitted to the adult wards and you could hear the children yelling when their mothers and fathers were leaving so it was really [pause] I only saw one child, when I was in Australia, who really shouldn’t have been in without a mother.  They all settled down, put their fingers in their mouth and looked at the others because you see our children’s ward was very nice, we had all sorts of things in it – there was a motorcar, there was a tricycle, there was [pause] seven dwarves, paintings on the lamps.  I think it was Mickey Mouse and that sort of thing, so it was really [pause].
MM:	Was that common then, to have specially decorated children’s wards to make them as pleasant as possible?
NO’B:	Well, that happened to be in Sellyoak and they were dressed, when they were recuperating, they were dressed in hospital clothes and they could get up and get around.  Every morning they were washed and changed into day clothes and then they were able to get about but you wouldn’t have found that here.  But I can only talk about that hospital because I don’t know about the others.
MM:	Did you get to see much of the Birmingham area or were your hours too long?
NO’B:	Oh you had your off duty and you know, you had your two hours off.  You might also have time off for lectures or you might have to go to a lecture in your off duty time.  It would just depend on how short they were of staff on the ward but you could be off and then you had your one evening, you were off at half past six in the evening and then you had your day off.  You did what you liked on your day off.  You could be out all day.
NO’B:	Well, mostly we went into town or we went to the theatre or we went to go – it was very easy, Birmingham was very easy to get out into the countryside – to go out into Warwickshire or the hills, to go into Shakespeare country, it was very easy to get out of the city.
MM:	Presumably there was a blackout at night?
NO’B:	At night, yes.  We wouldn’t be out late at night, on your own.  I did once have to walk – an Irish dance, the only one I ever went to, at one of the church halls and I missed the last tram and had to walk from the city centre almost out to Sellyoak.
MM:	How far was that?
NO’B:	It would have been about three miles we were out.  We were beside Bourneville.  Do you know what Bourneville is?
MM:	The chocolate factory?
NO’B:	Yes, the factory was very near us and the model village of Bourneville, our nurse’s home was on the south side.  It was beside Bourneville so you could always smell the chocolate when it was going to rain and you could smell the chocolate most of the time.  The Cadburys lived somewhere near.  They were Quakers and they lived in this sort of Quaker settlement, some of them.  
MM:	Was that in an area with other families?
NO’B:	With them, yes, all of the Cadburys lived there.  They were very good, the Quakers, very good in their various enterprises.  
MM:	I think Quaker families did tend to make very good employers but Cadburys has long been in multinational hands.
NO’B:	Yes, when it belonged to Cadburys, they tell me, you were allowed to eat as many chocolates as you liked and after you did that, you didn’t want any more anyway [both laugh].  So it was very wise.  You could eat what you wanted to when you first went.
MM:	And did you make friends with any English girls or families?
NO’B:	Yes.  When you went in, you see, you had a certain group, and that group, wherever they came from remained fairly good friends.
MM:	Do you remember ever discussing what was going in the war?
NO’B:	I don’t remember at all.  I remember discussing it far more here when I was going to school before going to England, around 1938 and that, and discussing it far more then than we ever did there.  
MM:	I know censorship was quite strict but since they had been bombed and the war was quite definitely still going on [pause]?
NO’B:	I suppose we just got so used to it, it was just a way of living.
MM:	Did you ever come across any casualties, from bombing or fighting?
NO’B:	No, it was too late in one sense but in 1944 when they were bring up the [pause] after D-Day, after the landings, the special landings, all the hospitals in Birmingham were taking in casualties except ours.  Ours was the one hospital which was to remain only for civilians.  But even then we had to give up a ward but we didn’t really [pause] the patients we had had already had primary treatment so there were casualties but they were walking casualties, the ones we had.  It was to bring them away from the south, which was still being bombed, that’s why they came up to us.  The only thing too is that in 1944, when I wanted to go home, I couldn’t go home.  I couldn’t come to Ireland in 1944.
MM:	You couldn’t get a travel permit?
NO’B:	There was a ban on all travel between Ireland and England in 1944, just before D-Day but our hospital had a rule that if you started on the 1st June you had your holiday in May and you came back on the 1st June so that [pause] it was May and I couldn’t [pause].
MM:	Was that relaxed after the landings had finished?
NO’B:	I don’t when it was relaxed because my holidays had gone and it wasn’t until 1945, when actually I was in Dublin when peace was declared.
MM:	It is interesting because I’ve seen records of the numbers of people who acquired travel permits to go to England and they’re not awfully accurate but certainly in the mid years of the war from about 1941 to 1943, the numbers really were very high of people travelling from here to go to war work and then they dropped right off in 1944.  There’s a lot of speculation about why that might have been, whether people were returning because the war jobs were finishing?
NO’B:	I don’t remember that because well, two of my cousins, well one finished her training and she came to live in Monaghan and then another one left because her mother called her home from London.  She came home during the war, she was home just before I went because I got a lot of her books.  I took them with me but she came home, I don’t remember any problem about it but for me, it was just that particular time there was a ban.  But they made provision for me because there was a place up in Shropshire where nurses who couldn’t go home – it was for convalescent nurses who were sick.  There was one Irish girl and she had her tonsils out and she was going up and I went with her.  I paid for myself but they made arrangements for me to go to this farm in Shropshire so I had a holiday.  It was like being in another world it was so quiet.  There were American soldiers nearby and it was really funny to see the difference between the Americans and the British.  The Americans were – well, if you were going past the American barracks the guns would be up on the post and you’d see the sentry with his elbow against it leaning over [laughs] in comparison to the British soldier who’d be standing like this [at attention].  
MM:	Did you have any direct contact with the soldiers?
NO’B:	Not really [pause] well, there were a few who used to come out, to come out to where I was staying.  The family had invited a couple of the soldiers out.  They would always say hi as you were going past – they were very relaxed [laughs] but I didn’t have anything in particular to do with them.  
MM:	One of my interviewees in the North told me the American soldiers were much sought after because they had access to so many extras, they could get nylons and chocolate and such things.  They were not only better paid but better supplied.  
NO’B:	That was true too in the North.
MM:	One of the things that struck me about accounts of American soldiers in the North was that Northern men resented them because their manners were so much better and they thought they were showing them up.
NO’B:	Yes, but I suppose Americans can put on the manners and they can take them off again.  When you’re an American far from home, I suppose, you go out of your way to try and make friends.
MM:	I’ve seen one of the handbooks that the soldiers were given before they landed in Ulster and they were quite definitely told to have manners on them.
NO’B:	Well, they were friendly – they were much more relaxed.  But whether that’s really good discipline, to be so relaxed, I don’t know.
MM:	Would you have been conscious of a different atmosphere in the run up to D-Day?
NO’B:	Yes.  Funny enough, you could hear at night the rumble – I was back in Birmingham now.  It started when I was in Shropshire but I came back and you could hear during the night, the rumbles of everything going south, south, south.  
MM:	I know it’s difficult to remember exactly but would you have been conscious that there was something momentous going on?
NO’B:	Well, you would know that something was coming up.  What it was you didn’t know but you would guess that something was coming up as they were all going south and that was the easiest way across, to go across from the south of England, coming down from the Midlands.  What it was, you know, I mean something was going on all the time so that there was troop movement everywhere, even across Europe and that, so that you were aware of that from the news but what this was going to be, we didn’t know. 
MM:	So you were just on holiday here when the war ended?
NO’B:	Yes, I was on holiday.  Yes, it was May so it was my time for a holiday again [laughs].  I was in Dublin, this time, that was two years.
MM:	What was the atmosphere like – were people glad it was over or did it make any kind of impact?
NO’B:	I don’t remember any kind of fuss.  I remember my brother coming in – he told me, actually, that peace had been declared when he came in for the dinner, as they used to do in those days.  He came in on the bike from the office, come home for their dinner, but the only thing I remember is my friend not understanding me.  I have a very bad habit of speaking like the person I’m talking to and the Birmingham accent was so bad I could even hear it myself.  It was like my Aussie accent, I could hear that one too.
MM:	Were you the only one in your family who had gone away?
NO’B:	Gone away to England? At that time, yes.
MM:	Where do you come in the family?
NO’B:	I’m the seventh [laughs].
MM:	So there were six ahead of you.  And did they find it easy to get work here or did they eventually travel too?
NO’B:	Well, they’re civil servants, the whole lot of them.  Well, one of them died at eighteen, just before his Leaving Cert., and then there was Kitty, Dermot, Kevin, Jimmy, they were all in the civil service.  Kitty was a Writing Assistant and Kevin was Junior Ex.  I think Kevin went in as a Junior Ex., and then he went on.  
MM:	Did Kitty stay on as a Writing Assistant or did she get promoted?
NO’B:	No, she didn’t.  She remained a Writing Assistant for a very good reason – she couldn’t speak a word of Irish.  Every time she went up for it [laughs] she flunked the Irish.  She tried to learn it but she really didn’t put her heart into it.  She was born in England and Dermot was too.  I was the first one actually born in [pause] after the family moved back from London.  My mother and father got married in London.  She was a schoolteacher there and my father was in the civil service and he got a chance to come back to Dublin when somebody from Britain in Dublin wanted to exchange, so they exchanged and came to Dublin.  He was in the Land Commission.
MM:	You were saying that you had no languages, did that include Irish? When you wanted to change secondary schools?
NO’B:	Well, no.  You know the way they do French and that sort of thing, well, we didn’t do French or German or anything like that.  Most of the other schools did but they didn’t do Commerce so to get another place in another school, it would have been difficult.  But anyway, I suppose my mother thought I should be a secretary, or whatever [laughs].
MM:	Was there an expectation when you became independent that you might contribute to the family income?
NO’B:	No, never.  I was fortunate to have all my brothers ahead of me.  
MM:	Did they stay at home or were they living independently too?
NO’B:	Well, the first wedding was in 1961 and it wasn’t the eldest one and I remember very well at the wedding, some woman, I can’t even remember who it was but she was just chatting to my mother and she said well, never mind, Mrs. O’Brien, you’ve lost a son but you’ve gained a daughter.  And my mother said what?  I thought they were never going to move [both laugh].
MM:	A friend of mind has two sons living at home who are obviously with her for life so quite how your mother managed, I can’t imagine. 
NO’B:	You see my mother brought the boys up to look after themselves and there was no difference between a boy and a girl in the family.  There were only two girls, you see, and nine boys and she was determined that no way were they going to get away with the idea that the girls would look after the boys so that she [pause] they were no bother.  Everybody did whatever was to be done in the house, yes.   But you see, as the older ones were growing up and the younger ones were coming up so you see, they sort of got out of the jobs as the younger ones were coming up for it.  
MM:	Your father was in the Land Commission?
NO’B:	He died in 1943.  The year I went away, six months later, he died.  He was ill when I went.
MM:	Did you come back for the funeral?
NO’B:	I didn’t know anything – my mother didn’t write until much later.
MM:	That must have been very distressing?
NO’B:	Well, I suppose it would have been difficult anyway.  Anyway, I don’t want to go to funerals – I still don’t like them.
MM:	I’m not too fond of them myself.  So, when your mother [pause] I presume with so many children your mother wasn’t working outside the home?
NO’B:	No, she wasn’t.  In those days, they didn’t.  Some mothers had to but they weren’t really in full time employment, a lot of the women who were working, they were doing jobs where they went out for a few hours, waitress jobs, things like that, unless [pause] there were women working but they usually had a servant in the house.  Like, a lot of our teachers in Marlborough Street were married but there was somebody at home.
MM:	Was your mother tempted to go back to work at any point?
NO’B:	Well, she couldn’t go back to work because you see, again she didn’t have Irish and you could not get a job without Irish.  Kitty got into the civil servant by being coached terribly well by one of the teachers in Marlborough Street and she managed to get into the servant, but then she didn’t manage to get up.
MM:	I’ve seen job descriptions from the forties where there were outlines of the different jobs from Writing Assistant through to Principal Officer and it was quite clearly gender based.  It was expected that Writing Assistants and Clerical Assistants and Officers would be mainly women because they were expected to marry and leave.  Was it like that in nursing in the sense [pause]?
NO’B:	Well, you see there were no men in nursing when I first started.  Male nurses only came in later but it wouldn’t have mattered at all because there wouldn’t be enough male nurses to take all the posts anyway.  And Matrons were always – I never met a male Director of Nursing, as they call them now, but all the Matrons I knew of were female.  
MM:	There seemed to be a marriage bar in public hospitals but I’m not so sure of the private or voluntary hospitals.  Would you remember anything about that in Sellyoak?
NO’B:	There were very few married people at all and mostly those who did marry left but whether they had to leave or they chose to, I don’t know, whether that was a requirement.  But I know one of the ward sisters was married out of I don’t know how many in Sellyoak, but none of the senior sisters were married.  There were a lot of the women who were married and who would look after the home for them, when you think in terms of what was available.  I think the man also expected the woman more or less to be there when he got in [laughs].
MM:	There still seemed to be an element of almost Victorian attitudes to families that a man’s status was recognised by his not needing his wife to support him economically.
NO’B:	That he could support her, yes.
MM:	Times have changed quite a bit [laughs].
NO’B:	They have and I don’t know whether it’s really for the better.  It depends.  Now there are females who seem to manage very well and do everything but it’s an awful [pause] when I see them outside the school here, bringing the children in the morning and coming back for them at noon and bringing them back for something in the afternoon, do they ever stop?
MM:	My sisters – their children are much younger than mine and no, they don’t.
NO’B:	They don’t stop and if they have a job as well?
MM:	Despite a lot of changes, it still does seem to be largely expected that the mother will arrange the childminder and look after the domestic arrangements.
NO’B:	Yes, and it all costs money.  How much do they get out of it at the end of the day?


Nancy Interview, 9th October 2003

NOB1

