Nora, Dublin.  Interview: 18th January 2002.

IM:	My name is Nora. I’m 79 years of age.  I started my education in Mountmellick and then went on to Tourmaceady, which was a college for training primary school teachers on the shores of Lough Mask.  In 1941, I finished there and went to Carysfort and I was two years there when I was offered a job in the Civil Service as Executive Officer which my mother strongly recommended me to take, a bird in the hand being worth a lot more in that time [laughs] - a steady job with a pension.  So I left the training college and went into the Department of Supplies, which was dealing with rationing, basically, during the war years.  The offices were out in the old Sweepstakes, a huge big room in Ballsbridge.  It was [pause] because it was a new department, it had no rigid structures; it was probably much more open than other Government departments. There was no particular discrimination that I was conscious of at that stage there, any sort of sex or gender differentials, which I did experience later on now in the Civil Service but not at that particular point in time.
MM:	Sean Lemass was the Minister?
IM:	He would have been but I wouldn’t have had anything to do with him [laughs].  There were [pause] I suppose I was the only woman Executive Officer in the Department, I think there were only about [pause] there was one other, maybe one or two others, we were a rare enough breed.  I was there [pause] to deal with rationing, issuing licences for leather or tea, sugar, that sort of thing, basic sort of work with a large group of people, very little hierarchical structures.  We were [pause] a lot of female writing assistants and female and male clerical officers and then male executive officers.  
MM:	Would the clerical officers have reported to you?  Would you have had supervisory duties?
IM:	Yes, yes.  But in a sense less so than in an ordinary Government department because people were doing their own thing more or less.  They might perhaps consult you if there was some amount involved, but basically everybody did their own job, that’s my memory of it.  At the end of the war then, we were transferred to the Department of Industry and Commerce, which was allied quite closely to the Department of Supplies and I was there for a few years, still dealing with export licences [laughs].
MM:	Would you have noticed much difference in the attitude to the work, going to a more established department?
IM:	Well again, Industry and Commerce was a relatively new department, again, less structured than the Department of Posts and Telegraphs, which I finally [pause] finished in.  But it got to the stage where there was nothing for us to do.  I used to bring in a book with a gaudy cover and hold this up and read it when any of the bosses where walking around to indicate [pause].  So finally, I got fed up and I applied for a transfer.  I’d a brother in the Department of Posts and Telegraphs and I applied for a transfer to Posts and Telegraphs on the grounds that I hadn’t enough work and I was called up to the office and they told me they would forward this application but if I took out the reference to not having enough work, they would forward it.
MM:	Internal politics?
IM:	I mean, they didn’t want it going around the place that they hadn’t enough work for their staff so I accepted that.  I mean, I wanted to get out and I wasn’t going to make an issue of principle about it and I transferred then to the Department of Posts and Telegraphs.  That would be at the very end of the forties.  
MM:	Can we go back a little bit?  When you were working on rationing, how did your average day [pause] were you given instructions by somebody like an Assistant Principal?
IM:	Higher Executive Officer.
MM:	And then did you allocate the work to the Clerical Officers?
IM:	No, the Higher Executive Officer would probably have done most of that as well.  I would have done a certain amount of it.
MM:	So what was your role specifically, that you had the higher grade?
IM:	I would have been responsible for the work, I suppose, for about six: two Clerical Officers probably and four Writing Assistants, something of that order.
MM:	In terms of your responsibility, would you have had to check what they were doing, to make sure it was satisfactory?
IM:	More or less.  And see that their output [pause] make sure their output was satisfactory and that they were there when they were supposed to be there, that sort of thing [laughs].
MM:	You would have been quite young [pause] just in your twenties at that stage?
IM:	I was eighteen when I went in, in 1941 [pause].
MM:	Did you get any training in supervising, how to tell somebody what to do?
IM:	Not at all; no such niceties at that stage [laughs].  There was so much work you were just thrown in cold into it.
MM:	Did you get involved in devising the rationing system or was that already operating?
IM:	No, no, that was already there, this was ’41.  The system was already there, it was just that there were huge blocks of work, rationing tea, sugar, all those things, you know.  Everybody had to get their ration card – it was just pure slogging work.  There was nothing challenging.  I mean, there’d be the odd query, somebody maybe forging, but it was all [pause].
MM:	So from the point of view of relations with the other Executive Officers and Higher Executive Officers, was there any problem with the fact that you were a woman and that was unusual. 
IM:	No, not really.  It was [pause] everybody there was very young, you see, most of the people, including the higher people, wouldn’t have been that old, either, because of the needs of the situation.  I don’t remember being conscious of any [pause] problems because of being a woman.  But then I was a very self-confident young woman [both laugh].  I moved from a solely female environment, full of confidence.  I did extremely well [pause].
MM:	It was a boarding school?
IM:	Yes, and I had excellent results in my Leaving Cert., you know, I could have gone to the university.
MM:	Did you choose not to because of your mother advising you it was better to take the job?
IM:	That’s right, yes.  Couldn’t afford it.
MM:	Were there nuns teaching you?
IM:	There were about two nuns and mainly lay teachers.
MM:	Would they have helped build up that sense of confidence – that you could do anything you wanted?
IM:	I think I had it before I ever went [laughs].  I had it, before I ever went there, I had, without boasting now, but anything that I ever wanted, I achieved, I had no problems academically.  I was a bit better than most people; I had very little competition intellectually.
MM:	Given that, would it not have been possible for you to go on [pause] would you have resented that your obvious ability might have been curtailed?
IM:	I wouldn’t have been conscious of it at that stage, no, I probably resented it a little bit, but there was very little feminism at that time.  You were too glad to get a job.  No, there were huge numbers unemployed at that stage; huge emigration and we had huge surpluses of teachers [pause] a totally different environment, totally different.  
MM:	I must say it’s a theme that’s come up in a lot of the interviews - that you weren’t going to worry about conditions because having a job was bonus enough.
IM:	That’s right, that’s right.
MM:	It was only in later years that people look back and think it possibly wasn’t fair.
IM:	I do remember one thing, there was a young Writing Assistant, Angela was her name, and we used to write little notes to one other and reply.  Angela, I’d say do this or what about that and she’d write back: Ita I have done this or something.  And some of the higher people were a bit shirty about this.  They used to write little notes to themselves; but to see two women writing notes to one another on files [laughs] this was totally unique.
MM:	This was because you had female names?
IM:	That’s right, because it never happened before in the Department, I mean they’d never had a situation where there two women writing little notes to one another [both laugh].  They mentioned it to me and I totally ignored them and went on doing my own thing.  It wasn’t done in any sort of difficult way.
MM:	They were just conscious of a change?
IM:	Yes, that’s it.
MM:	What about your family circumstances – did your parents, could they afford easily to put you though boarding school?
IM:	Well, my father was dead, of course, he died when I was about three, and there was a family of eleven.  My mother was a teacher.  
MM:	Where did you come in the family?
IM:	I was the second youngest.
MM:	Did the others all go to secondary school?  
IM:	Yes, all of them went to second level, there were only two who went to third level.  
MM:	That must have been difficult for your mother?
IM:	Well, we all got scholarships.  That was the only reason she succeeded in putting us through, I think, because we got scholarships.  My mother’s comment was, when you got the results of your exam, no matter how well you did, where did you lose marks?  [Both laugh.]  You might get ninety per cent, you know, but what happened the other ten?  Where did you lose those marks – that was the sort of attitude she had.  Without being unduly fussed about it, you know.
MM:	Was she working as a teacher?
IM:	She was, yes.
MM:	That was probably unusual enough, in itself, to have a mother who was out at work.  You didn’t have any sense of being different?
IM:  	No, no.  But in fact we would have been the only people in the parish who got second level education.  The only family.  Later on, then it started but that was because of the scholarships.
MM:	The scholarships were to various different schools, presumably?  Would you have sat a series of exams or did you chose which school you wanted to go to and just try there?
IM:	Well, the scholarship was open, you could take it any second level school.
MM:	That was a local authority scholarship?
IM:	It was, yes, it was what they called a County Council scholarship.
MM:	And was there no possibility of doing that for university, for teaching training?
IM:	Oh yes, I could have, certainly it was there.  I certainly had more than enough marks to qualify for university but it was money.
MM:	You’d have had to keep yourself?  
IM:	Exactly, yes.
MM:	Did you ever regret that you left?
IM:	Yes, yes.  
MM:	What about later on?  I know people who went into the Civil Service and who were funded [pause] granted they were all men [laughs].  I don’t know if that was a policy but could you have [pause].
IM:	Well, that was just in some Departments.  In Revenue, they did it a lot.  I did start doing a commerce degree when I was in Posts and Telegraphs, but I was sick and I took a long time to get over that so I just left it.
MM:	Going back then, when you moved from Supplies and the ration cards to Industry and Commerce, did that involve a promotion or was it simply that they were finding you a job at the end of war?
IM:	Yes, they were finding me a job.  And that was again a most unusual situation because in the particular section, the export section, there were two other female Executive Officers as well as myself in the Department, which again was absolutely unheard of.  There was [pause] there had been one woman Principal Officer or Assistant Principal, but she had retired, and there were the three of us.
MM:	And the other two, were they equally unchallenged by what was going on?
IM:	They were.  In my memory, there was no [pause] in fact, my memory of the men was that they were supportive and they said great things about us and they expected great things from us.  That sort of attitude, but of course, they expected us to be leaving, the expectation was that you’d leave to get married.  I remember asking for particular training [pause] I had done a certain number of years and the man in charge, the Assistant Principal, called me in and he said what would I want to do that for and I said I wanted to learn and he said sure, it’s not worth our while, you’ll just leave to get married.  
MM:	And there was no way you could say you weren’t going to get married at that point?
IM:	No [laughs], I’m not going to get married.
MM:	And did you get the training, did you manage to push for it or were you just excluded?
IM:	I was just excluded from it.  Actually, I got it afterwards by sheer [pause] but it was the expectation that you had, or be conscious of discrimination, one just was not conscious of it at that particular point in history.
MM:	Well, I suppose too your education would have been aimed towards doing well to get a good job but ultimately to get married and have children.
IM:	Yes, that’s right; that was the assumption then.  That’s an assumption I would have and of course, we did very well in the work, you know, we were recognised that we were good.
MM:	And where along the line would it have been recognised, that people realised you were doing extremely well and that you had a good career prospect?  Were you consciously going after the career and leaving aside the marriage part or was it just something that happened?
IM:	I suppose it happened that way but I think if I really was keen on getting married I could have but I’d have had to leave. 
MM:	Would you have thought of it as quite a big sacrifice to make if the circumstances had [pause]?
IM:	But of course at that stage one out of about three women didn’t get married in Ireland and one out of every four men didn’t get married at all – that was the marriage pattern at that particular time.  So you weren’t any way unique in not being married.
MM:	But you were discriminated against in the expectation that you would?
IM:	Oh true, yes.
MM:	It was being held against you as a reason for not promoting you whereas [pause]  Posts and Telegraphs [pause]?
IM:	Then, it was a totally male dominated Department, totally male dominated.  There had been one other female Executive Officer, in fact she became a Higher Executive Officer, but she retired on marriage, so I was the sole Executive Officer and I was a sort of [pause] [laughs].  Promotion outlets were fairly slow.  To be fair now to Posts and Telegraphs they did promote me to Higher Executive Officer, I think it was a year or two after my going there.  I think it was very much resented by a lot of the men because they considered my seniority should start on the day I joined the Department and I had previous seniority.  There were objections by the Union but again, you know, that was the way it was.  I was given the promotion even though I was a woman and I was only there two years.  It’s [pause] in that case, it was discrimination in favour, so where does one [pause]?
MM:	Well I would have thought it was not so much discrimination as acceptance or recognition that you were very good at your job.
IM:	Yes, but I think the Union argued that the normal procedure was that you would go to the bottom of the promotion list when you transferred from a Department.
MM:	I don’t think that’s the case now?
IM:	Oh no, not at all, you’re talking back at the end of the 1940s, running into the early fifties.
MM:	Would that case have gone to arbitration outside the Department, like the Labour Court or did the Union just accept it?
IM:	No, I think they just accepted it.  It was probably recognised that I deserved it anyway, I don’t know.
MM:	But there wasn’t any bad feeling afterwards?
IM:	No, not really, not that I noticed [laughs].  No, no.
MM:	I know a friend of mine who’s given me an interview, her first job was in Posts and Telegraphs and you were an example to her.  She actually did get married and leave but she always said that you were known as the woman who had done well and people would point to you to say what could be done.  Were you conscious of being that kind of example?
IM:	Oh, I knew I was good, now, let’s be quite clear on that and I knew I ought to get to the top, so I did.  Well, I just missed the one, the Secretary, the top.
MM:	That presumably wasn’t because you were a woman?
IM:	No, not at that point.  Then of course, when I returned, I was on different boards – Telecom Eireann and the Bank of Ireland and others – I was fortunate that I retired before [pause] I was barely sixty when I retired.  Then I got all these others.
MM:	When you were starting on the ladder to promotion, did you feel it was your talent or because you worked harder than anyone else?
IM:	Oh undoubtedly I worked harder because I knew [pause] I mean, I’d be put into a section where they had problems and I’d get it whipped into shape, in a relatively short time, you know.  I was sort of a [pause] they used to use me as sort of a gofer in that sense, to organise things efficiently and to do things that they never thought they’d have to do.
MM:	So you have an eye for organisation, you do have the capacity [pause] was that something you were born with or something that came with experience?
IM:	I think I was born with it.  I think it’s something [pause] now obviously, it can be developed with training, you can get it, but I think it’s innate.
MM:	You weren’t trained to it, anyway?
IM:	No, no.  
MM:	What about others who were [pause] not necessarily fast-tracked, but obviously destined for higher things, men as well as women, were they given training?
IM:	No, it wasn’t done then.
MM:	So really everybody learned at the job?
IM:	That’s right.  Training would have started later on, now there were some talks and some special training, like telephonists, like I say for specific jobs that you had to be trained to do, but I’m talking about the general service, the general administrative and executive grades.  But there’s a lot of training now.  I mean there were training courses for Executive Officers and Higher Executive Officers – you know, the sort of thing that people now would take for granted and you would regard [pause].
MM:	But you personally, you didn’t ever get specific training?
IM:	I was sent on a training course when I was Higher Executive Officer, at the Institute of Public Administration, a three-month course, you went and spent two days every week or something like that.
MM:	So it was within working hours?
IM:	Yes, it was.
MM:	Again, going back to when you first went in, was an Executive Officer’s pay – the scales weren’t too bad really, by the standards of the time?
IM:	Oh no, it was regarded as a plum job, it was better than teaching now, better than primary teaching.
MM:	Were you immediately put into the pension scheme or was that when you reached twenty-one?
IM:	No, no, you were admitted immediately.  The women automatically got a third of their pension and a lump sum and then later on women could get half pension and a smaller lump sum but that was the only distinction there was on the pension side; there was that distinction.
MM:	There were quite distinct differences in the wage scales.
IM:	There were, there were, yes, well of course, you had single men and women on the same scale and in that sense, it wasn’t regarded as sex discrimination, although it was.  
MM:	I’ve seen some advertisements for single men where they were still getting slightly more than women although considerably less than married men.
IM:	Well, they were on exactly the same scale for Executives because I remember that.
MM:	What sort of hours would you have been working?
IM:	The hours? Well, in Supplies it was probably nine to five but later on now, I would have [pause] from when I was Higher Executive I would have done longer hours.
MM:	When you went in to Supplies, working in a big area, was there any kind of geographical distinction to show that you were in charge or was everybody in the same area?
IM:	From Higher Executive down we were all in the big space.  The Assistant Principal had his own room but there was no distinction that way, you were just sitting at a table and the other staff were sitting there too.
MM:	So did any people have their own desks or were you all at tables?
IM:	Tables, I think, big tables.
MM:	The Writing Assistants – they were nearly all female, I think?  I’ve always been fascinated by the idea of that job – offices are so machine driven now.
IM:	That’s right, that’s right.  In fact, a lot of the letters that were sent out were hand-written.
MM:	Would you have had to deal with the public directly?  Would it simply be in correspondence?
IM:	No, there was an Inquiry Office all right but I wasn’t involved with that.  I mean, the phone was hardly used at that point, very few members of the public, in fact no members of the public would have telephones and the first time most of the members of staff would have used a telephone would be actually at work.  I remember one poor man he was so terrified – he was an Executive Officer too – he was so terrified of using the phone that he used to walk out when the phone would ring so that someone else would answer it.  He’d go red in the face at the thought of it.  I mean, it’s not surprising, no, no, because all of us were [pause] none of us had any experience of using the telephone.  You sort of forget.
MM:	Yes, I suppose it’s so much part of our lives between mobiles and everything [pause] I was trying to imagine the physical layout because somebody was describing to me recently the office where they worked and it was a typing pool and there were eight typewriters going and she said she ended up slightly deaf.  Now, you know, with computers, it would be phones that would be a problem in a large area but computers are relatively silent.  It was quite a different world.
IM:	It was, yes.
MM:	What about social contacts within the office, did you make friends in the area you were working in?
IM:	I did in [pause] well, not lasting friendships, except now I did in Industry and Commerce, the three Executive Officers we made [pause] and I still meet one of them regularly.
MM:	Did they stay on?
IM:	No, they both retired, they both retired on marriage.
MM:	What about later on when you were getting promoted, did you feel isolated in any way because you were moving past the majority of the other women?
IM:	I think it was one of the major impoverishments of my working life that it was a totally male environment, the further up I got on the ladder.  Now I would have secretaries, female, but it’s a different relationship, it is different, it has to be but it was a totally male environment, in that sense it was extremely impoverished.  I wouldn’t have been one of the lads, no, and that is [pause] I felt that I was always being challenged.
MM:	It sounds like you might have welcomed that in some ways?
IM:	In some ways, yes, I did, in some ways, yes I did, yes.
MM:	And what about relationships with people, other than friends you made at work, would it have been a problem that you were clearly so focussed on work and were successful?
IM:	I think probably it would have been later on that I made friends with women who were themselves achievers, people like Margaret Downes and Joyce O’Connor, I’m still very friendly with them.  It was extremely difficult to maintain [pause] I have one very close relationship with a woman I’m also friendly with her husband, where there was no connection and they wouldn’t be high achievers by any stretch of the imagination but I’m very friendly with them.
MM:	Just the ordinary minutiae of life when you were living in Dublin at first, how did you manage?
IM:	I was living in digs on Sandford Road with Neil Blaney’s aunt, who was the landlady.  Neil Blaney himself often stayed there and we had some great arguments.  There were a lot of university students there as well [pause] and then my sister moved, one of my sisters moved up to Dublin and we took a flat and then, my mother retired and she moved up and she bought a house in St. Laurence’s Road so we moved in with her and three, four sisters.  We had a very widely flung family so I’d a huge social life within the family, which [pause] basically, it wasn’t compelling [laughs].
MM:	So in a sense too you probably didn’t have to worry too much about the pressure of domestic chores?
IM:	No, no.
MM:	What about the arrangements with your mother?  Would you just have given her so much housekeeping money and she’d look after things?
IM:	That’s right [pause] no, no, I mean, I would always have contributed both in work and in money.  There was no question of [pause] you were brought down to size when I went from this very important job and I came back home again [laughs].  It was very good but I was expected to toe the line and do domestic work.
MM:	From what other people have been telling me, daughters were expected to hand up their pay packets to their mothers but while daughters were expected to do domestic chores, the sons weren’t and this was going on for years until they left home to get married.  Your family didn’t have that sort of arrangements?
IM:	Well, none of the sons were working.  One of them was a clerical student, both of them were students, we were keeping them more or less, with fees.  The males never contributed much in our family [both laugh].
MM:	What’s the actual balance in terms of sons and daughters?
IM:	There were seven daughters and five sons.  One son died when he was a baby and my eldest brother died very shortly after my father and then there were just the three of them.  Denis died then, some years after [pause].  We were poor in the sense that you remembered the first dress that you got that was bought for yourself, it wasn’t a hand me down.  It was a great thing to have a dress that was bought specifically for you.  In that sense there was certainly no opulence.
MM:	When you were going off to boarding school, were you having difficulty about it or were you just looking forward to the challenge of being out of the home?
IM:	I know I was fearful of that, going off [pause] well, Sinead was there too, I suppose, so that was [pause].
MM:	She went to the same school as you?
IM:	She did, yes.  She was there for about four years, going off every term.
MM:	How did you get there?  Did you have to take a train?
IM:	We got a train to Athlone and then you had to wait there and get a bus and then you got a cab or a taxi or [pause].
MM:	Would you get a chance to get home at weekends?
IM:	Oh not at all, not at all.  I mean, I wasn’t even brought home for Easter, because it would cost too much.  There wasn’t the money.  You knew you were there for three or four weeks at least, stuck there, with all the others gone home.
MM:	During term time would your mother have been in touch with you, even to ask you why aren’t you doing better?  [Both laugh.]
IM:	No, at that stage, no, she didn’t.  No, she didn’t, that particular part she didn’t, it was only at exam time that she did.
MM:	Had she given up work as a teacher?
IM:	No, she was still working as a teacher, although she was forced to retire at sixty.  Women teachers had to retire at sixty.
(Incomprehensible section of about two minutes.)
IM:	That’s right, yes, and you wouldn’t have the totally male dominated hierarchy that you have now.  There are a fair few women at Assistant Principal and Principal level now.
MM:	Do you think that made a difference to how the Civil Service operates, that there are more women at senior levels?
IM:	Well, it makes it certainly easier for women working in it, in that sense that there are other women and you don’t have this oppression, the totally male [pause] in that sense, yes.  I’m not a great believer in women producing a different sort of culture, sort of thing, I think as far as culture [pause] whatever qualities you have they’ll develop.  I’m not a great believer in a specifically feminine quality, culturally at least.
MM:	On a practical level, the more women there are, the more likely it is to be less rigid about childcare arrangements and that sort of thing.
IM:	On the level of self interest, yes, there would be more recognition of the need for that, yes.  But other than that, this idea of different roles, male and female sort of qualities complementing each other, I think everyone has the same qualities, regardless of sex.
MM:	During the war years, you were right in the middle of one of the most crucial areas, in the rationing section, would that have had a practical impact?  Not suggesting that you would have a greater ration than anyone else but maybe in other ways?  Would it have made life difficult if people knew where you were working, for example?
IM:	The war?  Oh yes, well of course, it did, oh God yes.  The quality [pause] but then I wasn’t used to much anyway.  You know, I’d gone from a very modest, in terms of food, into a boarding school where everything was pretty minimal, so I mean my expectations would have been very very low indeed, in terms of food.
MM:	I’ve had interviews with women in the North of Ireland who got around the rationing there by smuggling food up from the South, so obviously there was a much more generous ration here, or at least availability of rationed goods?
IM:	Well, there was the black market, oh yes.
MM:	Would you have ever been involved in dealing with that?
IM:	No, no.  In fact, I probably got a bit of black market stuff myself down in the country – eggs, or something like that.  And of course, you had the glimmer then too.  
MM:	It’s hard to imagine now.
IM:	It’s very hard even going back now, to imagine it.
MM:	Coming from [pause] I know there was very little concrete information about the progress of the war, because of the censorship, when it was all over was there any sense of shock about what had been kept from you?
IM:	Certainly, in Tourmaceady, the history teacher that we had would have been very [pause] so that I would have come out of school with the idea of any enemy of Britain being our friend, you know?  I’m not conscious of ever having heard anything about concentration camps or anything like that, even for years afterwards.  It would have been quite a few years after the war before I became conscious of all that had happened.
MM:	It’s become clearer in recent years that considerably more Southern Irish people enlisted in the Allied forces than would have been admitted at the time.  Would you have been aware of that?
IM:	No, no. 
MM:	Were your family very Nationalist?
IM:	No, no, it wasn’t a strong nationalist thing at all.  It would have been more Fine Gael than anything, my mother would have been.  It wasn’t a strong nationalist, chauvinistic culture – just getting on with living and making the best of what we had.  Really, it impinged very little.  I remember the bombing of Dublin all right, I remember that – hearing about it.  I was in Tourmaceady when that happened.  But it is surprising how little it impinged.  Of course, I was in an enclosed [pause] a small village and really Ireland had very little influence from anybody, even from Britain [pause] and life was hard.  Life was hard.
MM:	When you think about it, part of that was it was still a new state with a history of resistance to colonisation and maybe it did account for a lot of the rather extreme nationalism but this insistence on Irish, would you [pause] on a practical level, would you have had to do things through Irish in the Civil Service?
IM:	No, it was no problem because I had done everything through Irish in my secondary school, literally everything, we talked Irish, I mean, and then I’d go home and we’d speak Irish and I’d write home in Irish so I mean Irish was never any problem to me.  In fact, English was a problem starting in the Civil Service because I was so used to writing and talking in Irish all the time so that my English wasn’t as good as it should have been.
MM:	A woman who worked in the Rotunda, she came from a Southern Protestant background and she was looking for promotion – she was a medical social worker - and the reason she was told she wouldn’t be promoted was because she didn’t speak Irish because the Protestant secondary schools didn’t teach it.  She felt that it was really her religious background that was the problem and the language was just an excuse.  Would you have been conscious or did you know anybody from that background – there seems to have been a policy of exclusion of people who would have been candidates for the Civil Service before independence?
IM:	Yes, yes.  Well, this friend that I have now since back in the section where I was in Posts and Telegraphs, she was the daughter of a Protestant minister in Wicklow but she, as an adult, she converted to Catholicism so she had the dual sort of background.  But I mean, I often talked to her about it and she never really felt that she experienced any discrimination on account of being a Protestant.  Now her sister didn’t convert, or her parents, so she would have a very [pause] she was never conscious of [pause].
MM:	It seems to have been a suggestion, rather than a definite policy, it wasn’t being stated explicitly but there was a definite attitude among senior civil servants that we look after our own and our own would definitely be a nationalist, Catholic ethos rather than a more pluralist approach?
(Incomprehensible section of less than one minute.)
IM:	It’s odd, really, because clearly there were Protestants who felt that it wasn’t a good place for them to be, until relatively recently, but Margaret now, she just didn’t have that sort of feeling but there were an awful lot of Protestants in Wicklow so they had a very strong community down there.  Perhaps it was in small communities that they would feel [pause].
MM:	Well, the woman who spoke to me was from the Methodist community in Gorey, so it would have been very small.
IM:	Yes, they’re a very small group, yes.  In fact, there were all sorts of pressures that she felt when she went to Belfast where she was accepted for her religion but she was very definitely excluded from some aspects of work because she was a woman.  She was working with victims of sexually transmitted diseases and the doctors tried to suggest that she shouldn’t know about such things.
IM:	Well, that figures.
MM:	Mind you, that was linked to a wider government policy as well.  In terms of [pause] you say the Union protested about your promotion when you went into Posts and Telegraphs, were you involved with the Union yourself?
IM:	Yes, I was a member although I mightn’t have been formally joined at that stage because I wasn’t that long there, but I never took an active part in the Union, just a member, paid my fees and attended the odd meeting.
MM:	Would you have been aware of various issues that came up?
IM:	Ah yes, yes.
MM:	Was it just that you were very busy doing your work, or that you didn’t agree with what they were doing?
IM:	Not so much that I didn’t agree with what they were doing as I didn’t have any great interest.  I think there was once when I took issue with them, they were looking for more money when I considered that they shouldn’t because of the state of the economy and the huge poverty and the numbers of people emigrating.  I thought it was scandalous to be looking for more money – I was severely censured.  I didn’t go on some protest march, deliberately, and I was censured afterwards.
MM:	Would your perception of that have changed now that we are aware of the kind of corruption that was really draining the country’s resources when ordinary people were being told to tighten their belts?
IM:	No, I still think I was right.  The amount that they drained would have been [pause] it wouldn’t have done all that much for a society when you had a huge amount of poverty, it would have been only a drop in the ocean.  I suppose you’re talking about Haughey and a few others?
MM:	Not even specifically the personal corruption, but in the sense that if you’re tied in with business you may direct your policies to benefit those who are likely to benefit most directly rather than thinking about what’s best for the general well being?
IM:	I wouldn’t have said that [pause] I think, I mean I know that a lot of people talk about corruption now, but I think the extent of it is considerably less than the perception.  I think it [pause] you have rotten eggs in every group in society and they had the capacity to do more damage because they were in power but other than that, I don’t believe that, I don’t think it was a corrupt society by any stretch of the imagination.  It was the times - we nearly didn’t survive as a nation because conditions were so bad.
MM:	So many people would look back to the forties, and the fifties in particular, the forties were [pause] there was an Emergency, there was still developing nationhood – from the Free State to the Republic – would you have thought then about the direction that the Free State was going to?  While I might not personally agree with the way people were doing things or the direction they wanted to take, there was a certain kind of rectitude in their attitude that seems to have been lost.  What do you think?
IM:	I remember being very proud of De Valera’s speech after Churchill criticised Ireland for not being in the War, the way he dealt with it and his statesmanship. I wasn’t conscious of [pause] I became involved in social matters at a rather later stage.  I’m trying to remember now [pause] we set up a sort of social study conference.  I used to run an annual summer school on issues that were crying out for discussion and I was deeply involved in that and we dealt with all sorts of things, including the North.  We were prepared to mobilise the Unionist case as well as the Nationalist case.
MM:	This was while you were still an active civil servant?
IM:	Oh yes.
MM:	And was it part of your duties at that time?
IM:	Oh no, no.    It was totally [pause] in fact, we started that in 1950, I think.  Well, my sister was involved with it as well.  There was a small group, there were two – a man from Dundalk and a man from Galway and a man from Cork – they advertised this summer school and I went to it and after that.  It had a different theme every year and we tried to get scholarships for people who couldn’t afford to attend so that there would be a cross section of people at the school with different points of view.
MM:	And were you consciously trying to influence people who could make a difference?
IM:	Yes. And inviting speakers; very prominent [pause] we had a lot of very prominent persons in Ireland, including the North, they would have spoken.
MM:	Who would have been invited to come?
IM:	Well, we would have had people from Queen’s University, we had all the politicians, Dukes, Conor Cruise O’Brien, all the whole gamut – McDowell.  Then we would have had prominent economists [pause] people from Oxford [pause].
MM:	And in the audience?   When you offered scholarships was that to get any particular type of person or group there?
IM:	No, no.  It would be probably trades unionists, or unemployed people, who wouldn’t otherwise get a chance of going to a thing like that or wouldn’t have a voice, wouldn’t have an opportunity.  
MM:	They might be active in their community?
IM:	Yes.  I suppose it’s about ten years since we gave up on that.
MM:	As a civil servant particularly, I would have thought you could have at times a fraught relationship with politicians, in that they change but the permanent civil servants don’t and yet you have to implement what could be radically changing policies.  Was that a source of frustration for you?
IM:	No, it was part of your professional ethic that you accepted the policy of whatever Minister was in power.  You see, in Posts and Telegraphs there wasn’t that much scope for [pause] it was only in the broadcasting side that there was scope for change and there were big changes there and I was involved directly with them, with many of those.  There was only one Minister that I felt from the very outset that it was very hard to deal with - otherwise I had great relations with most of the Ministers, I seemed to get on very well with them, for some [pause].
MM:	Presumably they recognised that you were going to do the job well?
IM:	Well, partly, yes, partly that.  I was reasonably good at establishing relationships with people as well, particularly if I had to [laughs].
MM:	Well, I know you were saying there were so few women who were senior, as the years went by, when you went in and there were all the Writing Assistants and Clerical Officers, would you have felt that perhaps they should be trying to do as well as you were?
IM:	Yes, I did a lot to try and encourage them to go ahead and apply, do another examination, if there was a promotion coming up to go for the interview, that sort of thing.  I would have made a point of that, and particularly for women.  Mind you, they’d very little confidence – no confidence in themselves really.
MM:	I know [pause] a woman who gave me an interview went in as a Clerical Officer and left when she got married.  She married a senior Civil Servant and when he heard what I was doing with the interview, he wanted to know why don’t you interview me, I’d know much more than her and it was her experience I was interested in and I was trying to politely tell him this.  But he was extremely annoyed because he felt that I was giving her ideas above her station, that she wouldn’t know as much as him.  It was extremely instructive about their relationship [both laugh].
IM:	That was par for the course.  There was some interview board I was seeing, and some man on the board said to me haven’t you done very well for yourself, why are you trying to get higher?.  And he asked me how I could possibly expect to deal with men and with members of the public.  And another experience I had, I’d a very snazzy hat on going into the interview and I heard one of the interviewers whistle.  God [laughs] such ignorance!
MM:	How would you have dealt with that, because presumably if you came back with a smart answer you’d immediately be written off?
IM:	You would, yes.  I think to be fair that the other interviewers were more open and I think I probably said to him that I’d succeeded up to then and I was a Higher Executive Officer and that if he looked at my track record, he’d see that I hadn’t had any problems whatever.  [Both laugh.]
Nora, 18th January 2002

N1

