Olive, Dublin. Interview: 3rd December 1996

MM:	Could you introduce yourself for the tape and tell me your maiden name, and when you were born and what sort of family you were born into?
OC:	Well, my name is Olive and I was born in 1925, just after Christmas in a provincial town and I was the second child.  I have a sister almost two years older than me and that completed the family.  I grew up in that provincial town and went to school in that provincial town.  Now my people were not from that provincial town because my father was working there when I was born and he continued to live there until his old age but he did not actually come from that part of the country, but I went to school there and then I came to Dublin, when I started nursing, as a student nurse.
MM: What did your parents do for a living?
OC: My father was in the motor trade and my mother, well, in those days my mother had been, had worked in England during the first World War in the ministry of something or other in London [laughs] but she was a house wife, a full time housewife.
MM: Yes.
OC: And my grandmother, my mother’s mother, and my mother’s sister also lived there, so, my father was in a house with five women, and it was quite interesting.  He coped very well really.  But do you want to hear more about that?
MM: Yes I would like to, it’s interesting.OC: My grandmother, my mother’s people come from Wexford and after my grandfather died my grandmother and her unmarried daughter came to live with us in our town because they were left very badly off and so we were all five together in this old Georgian house.  As I say, my father was in the motor trade.  He didn’t have his own business, he worked for somebody else.  And the wartime period which you’re interested in was, looking back, a very anxious time because petrol was rationed, cars went, as we used to say “off the road” but of course nothing was said to us children, he was the last of the old Victorians really, he had been brought up and my mother had been brought up by parents who were Victorian, which I think makes a great psychological interest 
MM: Do you mean?
OC:  Because it backwashed on to our generation, you know.
MM: And they wouldn’t have told you that they were concerned about money
OC: Oh no.MM: Would you have been aware of it yourself in any way?
OC: Well, our expectations were quite low, really, in one sense, and yes we were aware of it but when I said we weren’t, we weren’t so badly off, really badly off, you know but things were a struggle and my sister and well, of course, in those days secondary education had to be paid for, so in the middle of the war we had to leave school quite early and after my matric, which would be sort of fifth year and my sister because there just wasn’t money there.  But nobody said anything; we sort of took it in our stride.  On the other hand, my mother managed through good [pause] she had us taught the piano and we got to ballet lessons and my sister learned to play the organ.  She managed awfully well now looking back on it to give us quite a good general education for the amount of resources she had
MM: And what sort of school did you go to?
OC: I went, both my sister and I went to different schools which is quite interesting, we both went to co-educational schools [pause] and we had the benefit of a very liberal co-education, education which was good for us because we didn’t have brothers just these two sisters and quite a lot of sibling rivalry between us.
MM: Yes.
OC: It was very interesting; I could go on for hours [laughs].
MM: Do you think your parents took that into account when they sent you to those particular schools?
OC: No, well I don’t really know.  I think they, my sister was sent as a weekly border to X because it was probably the nearest secondary school and we were Church of Ireland people and in those days education perhaps was more segregated, you know, and then when I became secondary school age, the Grammar School re-opened and I was popped along there to support it.  My school days were so, so terribly happy, I had wonderful school, and looking back now we had a jolly good education in that place even though it was small.MM: Was it a very academically inclined education or broader?
OC: No, broader.  We were educated for life there, I still remember, things there that I value now, like having a wonderful Irish and French master who gave me a wonderful love for the Irish language which in those days among the Church of Ireland people, it was a kind of a political thing, we all had to do it.  Our parents were brought up under a different regime and didn’t know it and my father, even in the First World War, it was the political aspect of having to learn it, he found very difficult.  But I just loved the language.  We had a wonderful teacher who was a friend of Jack Yeats and I remember meeting Jack Yeats and all of these interesting people.  It was simply a great place, looking back now on the resources.MM: And would it have approached the education of boys and girls on an equal basis?
OC: Oh yes, yes.  I know, I know like when two girls’ hockey teams played hockey, they came to play hockey against us like, it was quite interesting to see what girls were like without boys.  We thought they were quite silly [pause] there was equality, there wasn’t the roles that girls should do things, it was quite forward looking really, looking back on it. 
MM: You were living in a household dominantly female.  Would that have made a difference to how you saw things? Was there any difference in your outlook on life that you were aware of in comparison to your contemporaries?
OC: Well of course I went to an ordinary National school with boys, but I didn’t really know anything about boys, you know really because I didn’t have brothers, only had friends who had brothers but I didn’t, in those days, I didn’t think very much about it really.  And what I thought was great about going to school with boys was that we went through the “spots” and everything together.  The worst was over by the time that you came out of secondary school.  You know there was no mystique [laughs] because it was all you know, you got passions for fellows and they wouldn’t [pause] in those days it was all so kind of innocent really.MM: Yes.
OC: It was really, so that I didn’t have any hang-ups.
MM: Well, in your earlier days of school before you had to leave for financial reasons, would you have expected to go on to third level?
OC: Well, it never occurred to us, our expectations were quite low in a way because, maybe I should have liked to have, probably.  But at the time, I would never even think of saying it, because there just wasn’t money there and while my sister, she was, I’m not sure, but we wouldn’t have been scholarship girls, quite near the top of our class but we wouldn’t have been scholarship girls 
MM:  And would have other girls from your class gone on to third level?
OC: Yes, yes, my best friend went and she was very [pause] we were great rivals in class even though she was my best friend.  But she went on and did awfully well in languages.  But we didn’t feel any deprivations for not having gone, you know.MM: So what age were you then when you did leave.
OC: I left school at about seventeen.  I was late enough going and I left school at seventeen and then I got an idea about doing nursing into my head.  I had an aunt who was a nurse but I didn’t have any of these wonderful games minding people, caring for people or any of that sort of nonsense.  I don’t know, my sister had, she had done a secretarial course and I just said I’ll do nursing without having any road to Damascus about the decision or anything [laughs].
MM: There wasn’t any pressure to go into a specifically female occupation?  Your sister did this secretarial course?
OC:  No, no, no, it was a matter of that then of course was 1944 and I mean, things were pretty tight still and that.MM: Would you have been aware of the high unemployment?
OC: No, my father, he was never out of a job and in his own way he was much revered in his provincial town.  He was a very straight man in a sense.  We managed, we managed quite well I think.  When I think of my mother [pause] we used to get places and do things.
MM: Did she get so much money from your father each week?
OC: She would have housekeeping every week and that’s it, but when I say that we were badly off, we weren’t badly off compared to some people but we were badly off.  My mother’s people, I think, were very well off and they were from Wexford, but her father, you know, was a frightfully bad businessman.  He always wanted to go to sea.  He was stuck into a family business in Wexford and he never sent anybody a bill or did anything like that.  A wonderful person but the biggest fool in Wexford.  Anybody who owed him money walked behind the hearse because he had never looked for his money.  So my grandmother was left very badly off.  The relics of auld decency [laughs] but you know what I mean.  My mother had been brought up with governesses and maids but not [pause] they would be Irish Protestant merchants, you know.
MM: She coped very well with slightly straightened circumstances?
OC: Oh yes, they just were happy to adapt MM: What would her domestic routine have been like when you were young?
OC: My mother?
MM: Yes.
OC: Well, my grandmother kind of ruled the house, a very forthright person, yes, very forthright, my grandmother and my mother didn’t get on particularly well because they were very alike and then this little unmarried aunt was the buffer but my father always had great respect for my grandmother.  My mother would always be sort of to him, “oh mother did this or did that” and he’d say “oh, she’s an old lady”, we had great respect for old people, and she had the best seat.  We lived in this old Georgian house.  She had the best seat beside the fire and the rest of us were frozen.  It never occurred to us that she wouldn’t have that best seat.
MM: And would your grandmother have reciprocated that respect to your father?
OC: Oh yes, yes.
MM: As a person or because he was a man?
OC: Oh no, as a person
MM: Yes.OC:  My mother was an extraordinary character because she was a great wit and she had a great sense of humour.  She was a kind of restless spirit and really, never really had scope.  I don’t know, what she would have been because my aunt told me that while they were children, they used to all play in this lovely garden and they’d all be fixed playing something, and then my mother would uproot them all, drag them all off to do something else.  She was restless.
MM:  Yes.
OC:  And there she was stuck in the town of D. right in the town, very little garden and she didn’t enough scope for that restless spirit but she came out with great wit and a marvellous sense of humour.
MM:  Is that something that you are aware of in retrospect or that you would have sense at the time?
OC: It’s hard to say, it’s hard to say, I think that we probably realised it at the time, not that she was a restless spirit but that she had a great sense of humour, could make up doggerel at will and you know, we had great laughs.  There was no television or anything like that.  We had great laughs with her and that sort of thing but she, I think she might have been discontented no matter where would have lived or what she would have done but that was vital.  It wasn’t apathy, discontent was better than apathy.  You’ve got the picture [laughs].MM: So then did you decide to go to Dublin to do your training or was there a choice about it?
OC:  Well no, there wasn’t a choice then because there was only the little hospital in D.  It was the cottage hospital where I was born myself; there certainly wasn’t a training school, so of course it would be Dublin.  So then I decided to apply to the hospital.  Have I got to name it, if I want to talk about it?
MM:  No.
OC:  I started off there and before I left one of the local clergy in the town, he was a wise character said “you’ll be back in a fortnight” and that was what made me stay.  I was determined I wasn’t gong to be back but I was nervous.  I hadn’t been away before and the school was all so happy and lovely.  I didn’t say anything at home about it.
MM: It must have taken some courage to go on with it.
OC:  Well, I don’t think I was great but I don’t think anybody would have understood [pause] I think we were brought up not to expect happiness.  That was never said, but like, we were brought up to make the best of a situation.  There was no big deal to do it, and you hadn’t to be a marvellous person to feel like that, it was just the way it was.
MM:  Well, thinking about your friends at the time, do you think this was something that was peculiar to your family or did everybody [pause]?
OC:  No, everybody trudged along.  We all trudged along because no, I think it was a general thing.  People’s expectations wouldn’t have been so high and I mean, the word, teenager, had only just barely arrived when I was a teenager, and like, we never sort of thought about our identity.  You know of, you know, when you were at the menarche, that was explained to you and that all went on and then, oh you were at the spotty stage and then you were seventeen or eighteen and there was none of this, you know, of you’re on the brink of adulthood or this sort of thing.  In a way it was better, you just went on with things.
MM:  Yes, suppose sometimes if you think things are going to be difficult, it’s almost inevitable that they will be.
OC:  Yes.MM: so, when you went to Dublin, did you go by yourself or did you go with any of your friends?
OC:  No, I went on my own, because my pal had gone to Trinity and I went on my own and you know, it’s good for you and I always did do it, I never minded going into strangers, into places, because when you can start, not exactly alone, but it’s kind of a challenge.  But of course, there would have been about ten or twelve of us who started together but we only met the first day we went.
MM: And were you in a nurse’s home?
OC: I was in a nurse’s home, yes and it [pause] we were there for all the years we were in training and em, do you want me to talk on now about the conditions?
MM: Yes, please.
OC: You know, you think of things afterwards.
MM: Well, if you could just tell me a little about the nurse’s home and your reactions to it.OC: Yes, well, I was called for in January, we went in and I realised that there were about ten of us girls in the same group, or maybe twelve and in every group, after a day or two, you find friends and there was three of us became friends.  It was very interesting, one was from Dublin, one was from the country and had been to an awful boarding school, who thought that after the awful boarding school she was in, the nurse’s home was like freedom personified, we thought it was dreadful, dreadful because of all these rules.  So it was also quite interesting and we sort of had six weeks in the classroom in this nurse’s home before we were let loose anywhere near the wards.  But, we had to, my parents had to pay for me to train and that was the rule then and it was quite hard to get in.  There was quite a stiff interview and all that sort of thing, some months before.MM: Did you have to do an examination:
OC: Oh yes, we did and we had a medical.  So we were on, kind of, for three months we were on probation and at the end of the three months then if they were going to keep you, they signed you on and you signed a contract for the four years of your training and that an anxiety in case you wouldn’t be accepted.  Do you want to hear about my daily routine?
MM: Oh yes.OC:  We had a lot of domestic work to do, looking back on it, and when we were in this school, the nurse’s school, the sister tutor looked after us and in the mornings, we would all be sent down through the hospital, each one of us, to clean the bathrooms.  We were told that the object of cleaning the bathrooms in the morning was that when we were staff nurses and we would be in charge of wards, then we would know exactly what to look for in a clean bath.  Maybe it was true and maybe it was false but we all had to clean these bathrooms every morning and then go back into the classroom for the rest of the day and do lectures and things like that, and then we’d stud.  This was the first three months, with anatomy and physiology and things like that, after three months we would be launched onto the wards.MM:  Sorry, just to go back - your routine then while you were in the nurse’s home, while you were in preliminary training, what time in the morning would you start?
OC:  We’d start in the bathrooms at half past seven, we were called at half past six, breakfast at seven.  The night sister would come and say ‘Grace’ and you couldn’t be late for ‘Grace’.  We were all starving all the time you see, and we all put on a huge amount of weight because we were hungry all the time and we ate like mad then when we’d get out and we were abysmally poor.  Anyway, then we’d start and we’d be on all day until five, quite a long day.  And then at the weekend of that six weeks, it was really very nerve-wracking because you could be sent on to a ward and you could be told to do this, go here, do that, and you hadn’t a clue, you know, and it was all very strange.  Now, the whole thing, the main attitude to you was, we didn’t ask you to come, you asked to be here and that still pertains to this day and that really annoys me about it.  It was true of course but really we were [pause] and there was the hierarchic structure of course.  But after six weeks, for three months, we’d do a report from each ward.  Go to a ward for a month and sister would give a report, another ward for another month and then if those reports were satisfactory, we’d be signed on and then we started our training as such, after the preliminary training.  Uniform was provided, our laundry was done and we all shared cubicles in this nurse’s home.  It was like a dormitory and the conversations at nighttime, before we went to sleep, they were terribly entertaining.  But anyway, then we launched forth on those three years, almost four years.  Because we had to do three years, we had to do a minimum of two years to our finals and we had to give a year to the hospital.
MM:  Working as?
OC:  As a staff nurse.MM:  Would you have specialised in any way?
OC:  No, well we had to, we were all moved around, two months in this ward and two months in another.  Well now, the sister’s reputation from one ward to another would go ahead, so there was more to be dreaded going to, because the sister would be quite frightful and when we got there, she might like us and that would be fine but you might go to a ward where the sister was lovely, but then she wouldn’t like you and it wouldn’t be fine.  But that’s human relationships, isn’t it?  Well, it was all very hierarchical, there was always a hierarchy even in the nurse’s home so anybody who was six months ahead of you in your training, on the stairs in the nurse’s home, if they were coming down and you were coming back, or going up, you stood back and let them down.  That was the pecking order.  Then if a crowd came in six months after you well then you’d be on the first rung of the ladder and somebody would be coming up, you’d come down and say ‘thank you’ because they were six months behind you.
MM:  And who passed on this instruction or was it something that was assumed?OC:  I don’t know really, we were terrified, terrified of the staff nurses and they were four years older than us but they were finished and they were doing their year in the hospital and they were something great, we hoped to be like them.  But our off duty, we worked 104 hours per fortnight, I remember that, I’m sorry I haven’t the old brochure to show you.  104 hours a fortnight, now sometimes it would be a split shift, sometimes from half past seven to five, or sometimes half past seven in the morning until nine o’clock at night with a break between two and five.  We got two days, two consecutive days off a month.  You didn’t have any choice about it, maybe when you got towards your final and your sister was getting married, well you might have a hope of getting off for that wedding.  Now, if sister was decent she’d give you a half-day before the two days but she didn’t have to, in other words you’d be off at two o’clock before your two days off, but she didn’t have to, so you might have the first two days in January off and the last two days in February.  But everybody was in the same boat.  I know there was another hospital, under the religious in Dublin, and the poor girls there on their days off, had to go back and spend every night in the nurse’s home.  But at least we got away for two days.MM:  Did you go home:
OC:  We went home.  We had to say where we were going for the two days and we would go home.  Well, we would mostly go home, with the dirty washing, go home to get fed again and all that sort of carry on.  Then on the night duty, you’d be put on night duty when you had done about six months.  I much preferred it to day duty but it was very long.  Half past eight at night until half past eight in the morning and if you were a junior, you weren’t to be seen sitting down during the night, you wouldn’t be if you were a junior.  So if sister was on the rounds and it was quiet, you went into the bathroom and shut the door and you’d sit on the loo [laughs].  Well, we were very busy but you weren’t to be seen sitting down.  You were to be busy with other things if the patients were asleep, there would be something to be done in the bathroom, or for some reason work went on and at one stage, we had lectures during the night.  That didn’t last too long, it was very tough.  We had to go down for classes in the night.  So it was all terribly busy, we were very understaffed.  Now we didn’t have the turnover but because we were so repressed and all the rules were so dreadful, we had great fun.  We had great fun breaking these rules.  I mean, the breaking was so harmless but we were like children in school really.MM:  Was that true of the other hospitals, did you hear?
OC:  Yes, more or less, more or less, except we were not, under any account, allowed to wear cardigans during the night.
MM:  No matter how cold it was?
OC:  No, we had capes, dreadful capes which would go on for night duty but we weren’t allowed wear them during the night.  Now this was in 1944/45 and some girls got chilblains on their upper arms from the cold.  No cardigans, it was unprofessional.  Short sleeves [laughs] it was dreadful but you see, everybody was the same.MM:  And was the bad food due to policy or the rationing?
OC:  Well, you see they had rationing mostly.  Now the sister tutor, who had us under her wing for a few months, she was awfully good to us really, and she would shove a bit of extra butter on.  The ration was quite good here in Ireland compared to England but she’d shove a bit of extra butter on to the table for us.  You know, she looked after her girls but when we were out on the wards, it was every man for himself.  The dining room, it wasn’t a canteen it was a dining room, and there was a top table where the sisters sat and they always the cream from the milk.  Little did they realise then that it was much better for our health to have skimmed milk but we got the skimmed milk, and that sort of thing.  You know, it was quite unfair because the rationing was all level, we should each have been getting the same, but they didn’t want that.  The rationing in Ireland was quite different, because I did work in England later and there, that was something else.MM: That was when you were qualified?
OC:  Yes, I was qualified.  But anyway, Christmas was another time.  Nobody was allowed off duty.  Everybody in the hospital was on duty, all over Christmas and in the heel of the hunt I think it was quite a good idea, because it meant that there was no unfairness about letting people off, you know, letting certain people off.MM:  But when you say that nobody was allowed off, was that just the nurses or would it have included the doctors?
OC:  Oh no, the medics, well of course the medics were a race apart.  They were a race apart and the medical students and we had great fun.  We really did have great fun and great friendships with the medical students and that sort of thing but of no, they wouldn’t, they would be under a different auspices altogether, much higher social order [laughs] for all that.  But another thing was sick leave.  Now, you were allowed so much sick leave a year, I can’t remember, perhaps a week, and if you went over that you had to make it up at the end of your four years, which was I think, fair enough.  But, it was all very much your duty to the hospital.  I remember one girl, a contemporary of mine, and like, her brother got meningitis and he lived down in Sligo.  There were different sorts of meningitis but this was a serious one and she went and asked Matron could she go home and Matron said, I’m sorry you can’t. And she said I must see my brother, he’s got meningitis and I’m going and she said well, you’ve lost your vocation then.  The girl’s father had to come up from Sligo and beg Matron because you know, the girl couldn’t go home for two days because she’d had her days off that month, even to see her brother.  I mean, it was inhuman when you think of it, a case like that.
MM:  Would this have simply to enforce discipline or because they worried about her bringing the infection back to the hospital?
OC: Oh no, it was to enforce discipline, a power thing, I presume.  I suppose that Matron, somebody had done that to her.  She was just part of the system, it wasn’t personal at all.MM:  This is something that interests me; the way the system perpetuated itself.  Instead of people seeing how awful it was and wanting to change it, as soon as they moved up, they were just as bad.
OC:  You might have wanted to change it but it was just not possible.  You conformed and if you conformed, you got on all right, and if you rebelled, you did not get on all right.  I was one of the people who conformed because I didn’t have any guts although I could see that things were wrong.  But I was there to get through my training and get out the other side.  Like, expediency was all and at times, now, I consider, I don’t admire myself for having been like that but [pause].
MM:  You didn’t have much choice, really.
OC:  No, I didn’t have much choice but on the other hand, there were others who rebelled.
MM:  Did they survive?
OC:   Yes they did, but of course, you had to get a reference, you needed glowing references and all the rest of it, you know, and the cute ones kept the nose down and got on with it.  The brave ones did a bit of fighting for us, you know, in a way.  But anyway, the hierarchy [pause].MM:  And what was the attitude to marriage and boyfriends? I presume you weren’t allowed to have boyfriends in the nurse’s home?
OC:  Oh well, there was a couple of nurses dances held in the year in the boardroom and you sent the name of your partner you wished to be asked to Matron and she would send him an invitation, having vetted him out, vetted that he was suitable.
MM:  And how did she go about doing that?
OC:  Well, there were various ways.  I mean if somebody wanted to ask a rather wild medical student as her partner, she was told he would not be suitable at all and like, really it was funny.  The Matron would stand in the hall and greet them going in, it was very formal, and then we’d be waiting for them instead.  It was like a convent really, as regards men.
MM:  It does sound a bit like that [laughs].
OC:  Anyway, then of course we had great fun breaking these rules because the main aim during the dance was to get into the students resident because if you were found in there, there’d be dreadful trouble so the thing was to get in and have drinks and that and there wouldn’t be anyone drunk or anything in those days, it was just for the gas of making it in there and having a drink or two and get out and you had done, and you’d had a bit of fun.  We used to entertain students a lot on night duty in the hospital kitchen, they’d come up and have coffee and sit around.  They’d be up every night and yet we got all this work done.MM: What was your level of responsibility like?
OC:  Quite a lot.  When you were junior, when you were senior you were responsible for a couple of wards, like a landing, and while people, the turnover, there was no intensive care or that in those days, you would have very ill people.  Oh yes, it was a big responsibility; you wouldn’t want to think about it.  
MM: And at what level would that have started?
OC:  Well, I did a senior night duty at only two years in but then the night sister was ultimately responsible and you’d ring for her to come up, but by jingo, you had to have an eye, you had to be smart.  Although you had the feeling somebody mightn’t be very well, you didn’t have all the technology but I mean, she was your baby or he was your baby, you know, and night duty was v very responsible.  Day duty too, but then you would have interns and things to call on, but we didn’t call on the interns nearly as much in my daughter’s day.  And we took on much more responsibility.MM:  Was that, do you think that the training emphasised personal responsibility where now it’s an emphasis on teamwork, or was it just the way you were?
OC:  Just the way we were, yes, just the way we were.
MM:  This part of getting on with things?
OC:  Yes, I mean, we managed to have fun as well, but not to the neglect of the patients.  I don’t know how we worked it, but then what we thought was exciting and fun.  I went back to the hospital years later as a patient when I was married, and the place was just dead because everybody could do everything so there was no [pause] I can’t explain it.  It was a different era and then there was a landing that was supposed to be haunted and you know, this sort of carry on, and we just enjoyed it.MM:  Did you get paid at any stage?
OC:  Oh yes, we got paid once a month, on the last Tuesday of the month there would be a board meeting, so on the first Wednesday after the last Tuesday of every month, we would be paid.  And we’d all go down to the medical office – there was a great gulf between office staff in hospitals and nurses, and we’d all meet at this office to collect our pay and the people would say here they are again, they think of nothing but money and the ones that smoked borrowed from the ones that didn’t, and as soon as they got paid the people they owed money to were turning round, saying you owe me this, you owe me that and we got paid, yes, once a month.  And incidentally, the office staff too sat with sisters and they got cream.  So I hope the ones of my age have all had really bad coronaries (both laugh).MM:  So they were higher on the pecking order as well?
OC:  Oh yes, definitely.  Anyway, once a month we got paid and when we finished, I remember, as a staff nurse.  Now we got paid that and our keep, we got our keep, bed and board and laundry and then my mother sent me 4s. every week and my sister, who had a good job as a secretary of the managing director of a firm, she sent me 10s. every month and I blessed her forever for it because that was a great lift-up.  But as a staff nurse at the end of four years I got £8 a month and that was in 1947.
MM:  That wasn’t really too bad - £2 a week.
OC:  Yes, and then you had a sister’s holidays like when you were in charge.
MM:  It compares reasonably well to the average industrial wage, on which people would have had to keep a family.  It’s not princely, but what sorts of things did you do with your money?OC:  Well we used to go to the pictures a lot and we used to go to the Theatre Royal a lot.  And tea was at four o’clock in the after noon, which was bread and jam, and supper was at half past seven, so if you went to the Theatre Royal – everyone was cold because there was very little heating – if you went to the Theatre Royal and sat through two shows to keep warm, it meant that you went hungry until the next morning unless you had a bar of chocolate or something.  It was terrible.
MM:  Wasn’t there anywhere beside the theatre that you could get something to eat, or could you not afford to?
OC:  Oh well, this was the Theatre Royal and you had this long show, they had a film and the dancing girls and Noel Purcell, and oh yes, you could go to Roberts and have coffee or something like that, but we didn’t have much money to spend.  My father was wonderful, he came up every week and every week he called to the hospital and whoever was off duty, myself or any of my pals, he’d bring us for tea in the Savoy, he fed us for four years.  And also brought us a cake every week.  So he came up every week and some of got to eat tea with him and if I wasn’t off, then he’d take off my pals and we had a regular slot in the Savoy Café.  He was very good to us.MM: And did rationing affect catering in somewhere like that?
O:  Not really, the Irish rationing was very mild.
MM:  Just anything that had to be imported?
OC:  Well, of course, fruit but that was more less, I started in 44, I started in January 44 and the war was over in May 45 and I remember the day that, VE day, I remember somebody brought champagne into the men’s ward and I remember we went in to the bathroom of the men’s ward and we all had a drink of champagne out of [pause] well the only thing we had to drink it out of was the jampots the flowers were put in on the wards.  Of course, if we were caught we’d be killed, just one drink of champagne but on the ward!  Oh dreadful, but those memories are very vivid.  But we had to sign in and out, of course, when we went out.  We had to sign out, if we had a half-day or something, wed have to sign out and we had to sign in.  And the nurse’s home door was shut after half past ten, so it was locked and if you were late you had to go to matron the next day.  When you were a staff nurse you were allowed one quarter past eleven leave once a week and you would for that.  The night sister would come and let you into the nurse’s home and one two o’clock, two a.m. leave, once a month, if you were going to a dance.
MM:  Did you have to explain where you were?
OC:  No, not really, because by that time you were finished but we weren’t allowed out after we came off duty.  We’d be off at nine and we weren’t allowed out.  But before I finished, we were allowed out.  We just wanted to get away, we were there all under one roof all the time, you know.MM: And what about girls who came from Dublin?  Did they have to be in the nurse’s home as well?
OC: Oh yes, they used to go home a lot during their off duty and in a way, some of them didn’t settle as well as we did because they managed to get home and then they’d have the horror of coming back.  But I had a good friend here in Clontarf, a friend of my mother’s, and I used to come out to see her and her great sop to me was to make me lovely big plate of chips and fried egg and say to me “Well, cry away there, you’ll be all right in a minute now.  I’ll make you some nice chips and a fried egg and you’ll feel better.”  And she saved me, because I couldn’t go home.  I wouldn’t have the money to go home.  You could be very unhappy, there was a lot of bullying, still is of course, but there was a lot of bullying and psychological warfare went on.  Women together, unfortunately.  And you’d be very unhappy at times and you couldn’t do anything about that.
MM:  And did anybody ever give way under that sort of pressure?
OC:  No and the way to cope with it would be, of course, we had one awful sister, she was a terrible coward really, she was really ancient, she was probably about 45 (both laugh) no she was 50, but her great saying was “who dragged you up?”.  And there was one girl, she was peeling an orange and she said “who dragged you up, you can’t peel an orange” and this girl turned to her and said “the maid always does it for me” and from that day forward, that sister never said a word to her.  Another thing, we did these bed baths, people were in bed much more and would need to be washed, and it was the inventory day on the ward and I said to her, that the sheet was wet and she was such a coward really and I said to her could I have a bucket to do the bed bath and she said “no you cannot have a bucket, the inventory will be wrong and if I catch you doing a bed bath without a bucket, you’ll be in Matron’s office tomorrow.”  So now, how you figure that out?  That was typical.MM: You were wrong no matter what you did.  What sort of backgrounds did the girls come from?
OC:  Well, all backgrounds.  There were girls who had brothers who were medical students, and there were sisters who were medical students.  There were Dublin girls, rather posh Anglo-Irish girls, there were girls whose fathers were in the bank; there were grammar school girls like myself.  Ah, there were so many [pause] mostly middle class. Mostly middle class because you had to have a secondary school education to get in, you see.MM:  The fees would probably have been beyond most working class girls at that stage.
OC:  Probably, yes.  Another very powerful person was the ward maid.  When you were very junior you had to make sure to get on with her.  There weren’t contract cleaners – there were ward maids.  I remember one, she was from Wexford, and if he liked you she could be a tower of strength, but if she didn’t, heaven help you.  It was as important to get on with her as it was with sister.
MM:  And what would her duties have been?
OC:  Well, she would clean the ward and she would have to wash up dishes and things like that, domestic duties.  And another very powerful person was the theatre porter because you might be sent down to the theatre with the patients and the theatre sister would rattle off to you what was done, so and so, so and so, and you mightn’t have heard quarter of the terms.  She would not repeat it, you had to go upstairs, you weren’t allowed write it down and repeat what was to be done.  Now if you missed anything of that you were in trouble because it could be important.  So the thing was to get on with the hospital porter, he’d great flat feet, and he knew all the orders you see, and you’d ask him and he’d repeat what was to be done.  That is if you got on with him, it was important, because he would help you out.  You spent your life on the edge of a precipice.  
MM:  You were pleasing everybody?
OC:  Yes, but those people were great to us, that’s if they liked you.  That was their power and the hospital porter was another one.  If the boyfriend rang you and he didn’t like you he wouldn’t bother telling you.  But that was the game, you know, it wasn’t that bad.
MM:  It sounds awful (both laugh).
OC:  We all survived, we all survived [laughs].MM:  Would you have been aware of what was going on in terms of the Second World War, did it affect you much?
OC:  Well this was started when I was in school.  The war started when I started secondary school and yes, I was very much aware of the war, because at home every news bulletin we’d listen to it on the radio, and we had, my pal’s brother was in the RAF and my parents would listen and when they say so many bombers were missing and all that, my parents would look at each others.
MM:  Were you picking up the radio from Northern Ireland or was this Radio Eireann?
OC:  Yes, it was the BBC but it would be on Irish radio too and I remember, I remember hearing Lord Haw Haw yes.  This is Germany calling, Germany calling and that horrible man.  We would be very, I suppose pro-British, in the sense that there were so many people around who volunteered and that, and then I remember when Belfast was bombed, the trains, even the fire brigades from D went up to Belfast and I remember the training coming down with all these kids on it and had a whole gang of them in the School for a while, until everything settled down and they went back.  I was fairly aware of it and there was no fruit and I remember at the [pause] having the flu when I was a kid during the war, and somebody knew somebody who happened to have a shipment come into D and I was quite sick, I think the flu or something, and he bought an orange he gave me an orange and we hadn’t seen an orange for years.  And I remember getting one banana and sharing it with people, things like that and I remember we were all fitted out for gas masks and of course, they were never used.  But yes, the war was a great part of our lives and then when I was a teenager, there was RAF prisoners of war were in G and they used to go into the town of D and we used to ask them … they had a great time, they played golf all the time.MM:  And did you ever see German prisoners of war?
OC:  No, there were none, they were in the Curragh.  This was another army camp, you see, they would come in to the local dances, but now they would be church dances.  They mightn’t have been so, there was a great divide there.  
MM: They weren’t kept such close prisoners then?
OC:  Really, they were on a kind of parole and of course, we thought this was very glamorous, these RAF fellows, like there weren’t hundreds of them but there was quite a few and then they used to play golf every morning.  Then one time, they’d all just disappeared and I think they were just pushed back over the border.  They were all bored silly, they were trying to get back into the war again and that sort of thing.  But I remember the war, the worry, the worry about people we knew who had volunteered and that sort of thing.
MM:  Would you have known people in the Irish army, the southern Irish army?
OC:  No, but there was a local force called the Defence Force and Security Force – we’d know people in that because they would be like ‘Dad’s Army’.  No, because there were very few Protestants in that, like the divide was such, in D it was a very Catholic town and the divide was there.  While we were respected, the divide was obvious.MM:  Were you aware of it in any adverse way?
OC: We didn’t think it was adverse because we were [pause] my father was very well respected in the town, this was with the local monsignor and all that sort of thing.  Perhaps, like children come home from national school and passing remarks and we were always told we weren’t to answer back.  But another family was told it could and we were raging because we couldn’t say anything.  We didn’t like that and I understand it all now but our parents just said, well just don’t answer back and there was no discussion that way.  Yes, there was, D was very - I do remember that and while I fully understand the reasons now and I have learned a lot, but they weren’t very hostile about it or anything like that but there was a feeling that [pause].
MM: I’ve interviewed some Northern Irish women who came from protestant backgrounds who said they felt a strong resentment of the South for staying neutral and they felt that they were actually hostile because they weren’t co-operating in the war effort.  Would your community have felt that?
OC:  No, because more people volunteered from the South than went form the North.  There was no conscription in the North and we were terribly Southern people and very southern and doctrinaire republican.  I mean I don’t owe, while my father, he fought for king and country in 1914-1918, I didn’t.  I was born in this stage, it’s the place I love, and I really feel strongly about it.  Don’t start me off, this is the place I love, I wouldn’t live anywhere else, this is my country and I love it, and you know, the northern people are as foreign to me as Puerto Ricans in their attitudes.  I hate to be perhaps even slotted in with their way of thinking of themselves.MM:  They identify their Protestantism with Unionism, at least the people I’ve spoken to.
OC:  Well, yes, that’s the pity of it and they, I suppose, have their own reasons, but I don’t want to be a part of that culture.  Absolutely.  But the war, I know when my first child was born, I knew some people in D who were much older than me who had been in Japanese camps during the war, and it was when my first child was born, the Matron had been one of these and she was sort of strange so I saw what the Japs had done to people and that, and I think it was quite frightening but of course, by then I was in my twenties and that.  I remember the bombing of Dublin.  I happened to be staying with a friend in Clontarf and we heard these planes going over and we were having a lovely time running around Clontarf chatting up the boy scouts and that sort of thing, I was a youngster of fourteen or something, and my mother rang up.  We didn’t have a phone in those days but my mother rang to say I as to go home the next day and I was positively raging and I never forget going home and she said, “oh, you’ll be safer at home” and I was so fed up I couldn’t say anything to her, my lovely holiday spoiled.  So I do remember.MM: Did she have any sense of anxiety about your going to Dublin to work?
OC: Yes, out into the big world?  Well, if she did, she didn’t say.  Odd wasn’t it?
MM: Well maybe she didn’t want to communicate it to you.
OC:  I think people were probably more trusting.  I don’t know, when you look at now. I suppose there was always the danger of falling in love with the wrong people but I don’t think it occurred to her.  I don’t know if it did but nothing was said.  I was launched into the world without really, what’s the word, really any education about what the world was like.
MM:  So what was the time frame?  You finished school in June 1943?
OC:  I finished in June and I started in January 1944.  I was just about six months at home.
MM:  Would you have been helping out with domestic duties during that time?
OC:  No, because my mother hated cooking and she always said, and I hated cooking, so she said I’m not going to teach you to cook, you’ll have to cook when you get married and you’ll be stuck with it for the rest of your life so enjoy yourself now.  Wasn’t she great?
MM:  But she still assumed that as a woman you’d be doing the cooking? (both laugh)OC: Oh yes.  It was interesting enough in that my grandmother did it, but my grandmother was a wonderful worker with her hands and she did the most beautiful knitting and crochet and eh, really did lovely work until she died.  During the war there was no wool, no cotton, and we would only have clothes on us when she’d have them off us and rip them to make else.  It was occupational therapy [laughs].MM: So do you think that changed the hierarchical structure of your household I that your grandmother did all the traditionally domestic things?
OC:  Well no, she only did it because she was the boss but she only did it for a few years and then she got too elderly, she just sat and got up late in the day and she did her knitting and then my mother sort of did it.  But my mother always was stuck with cooking, even when they lived in R.  My mother always seemed to stuck with the things she hated doing and the other sister seemed to, but she enjoyed her rebellion at the same time, you know, and in that way, it was I suppose it was tough.MM: For the cooking, what sort of shopping would she have had to do?  Going around all the local shops?
OC: Oh yes, my mother never did anything after two o’clock in the afternoon, one didn’t, you see.  No, there was no housework done after two o’clock.
MM: What was the afternoon for?
OC: The afternoon was for, well, my mother and aunt would go down town in the afternoon, shopping for the next day and we lived in a set of Georgian houses where there some fairly elderly people, quite an interesting social structure.  A lot of clergymen’s widows, and then somebody might call for a cup of tea.  You arrived by four and had to leave by six.OC:  I gave my years to the hospital and then an extra six months.  In the meantime, of the first three friends, I was almost engaged to the brother of one of them.  She had six brothers and I hooked one [laughs] but we had no money.  We knew we wouldn’t be getting married for a while and in those days you didn’t work after you were married unless you did private nursing.  You see there were no jobs for married women, so I said I’m going off for a year, I can’t bear to be hanging around, and do something else and come back and we’ll get married.
MM: Was it an official marriage bar?
OC:  Well, you couldn’t be married and work.  I think there was, as regards hospital training and all that sort of thing.  No, I don’t know whether it wasn’t available but the only thing I could have done after I was married was do private nursing through an agency, but that was a twelve hour day.  There was no other work.  Anyway, I went off to England to an RAF hospital to do plastic surgery, down in Sussex, and I had a great time there for a year and a half.  They had all these RAF pilots who’d been terribly badly burned and wonderful plastic surgery.  At that time, there was no plastic surgery in Ireland.  Our surgeon was from London and I really enjoyed that year and a half.  I wanted to do the course and get the qualification and it was a wonderful hospital.  It was different from the training hospital – it had a piano in every ward and all these RAF fellows with handlebar moustaches and things and then we had an awful lot of film stars used to come down to get cosmetic surgery done and it was a very exciting place after the parochialism of the Irish hospital.MM:  Was it a private hospital?
OC:  No, no, the N.H.S. had only just started and I remember they had this sort of committee that went around to know what we needed.  You know some of them were - this was far away from the coast, from the Battle of Britain time, they were still come back in 49 and 50 and we had these fellows who were blinded and for corneal graft and that was very exciting and wonderful work being done in it.  But I was terrified going there.  I went on my own.  I was supposed to go with a friend and she discovered she couldn’t leave her boyfriend so I had to sally off to the unknown over there and when you’ve got a qualification, your first job is quite a [pause].MM: How did you apply for the job?
OC: Well, I applied, of course, the Nursing Times then was that thick with “jobs vacant”, you could pick and choose wherever you wanted to go, they were all dying for us.  And I went over and I was even quaking in my shoes and I realised that my training was more than adequate for me to do this course.  I’d never been anywhere but my own training school and I really had a great year, almost two years there and really enjoyed it very much.  OC:  And the rationing was frightful and I remember the first week I was there, we had one egg a week and my egg was bad.  Oh, they said, hard luck and the next week my egg was bad again and I realised that everybody’s egg tasted like that, they were so stale and after a while I was eating the bad eggs.  We didn’t even get, in those, there was very severe rationing and then everybody got points, which meant that you could use points for chocolate or you could your points for sweets but we even had to hand up our points so the only thing we could buy to eat, away from the hospital, the only thing you could buy to eat was either tins of soup or fruit and the rationing was absolutely fierce.  We used to eat whale meat, which was dreadful.  Another thing was rook pie, which was a bag of black bones in a sort of gravy, and I suppose they were out shooting pigeons, I don’t know what was really in it [laughs].
MM:  But it was a very low fat diet, it was very good for you.
OC: Yes, it was, and the kitchen there, they really did great work and we had a lot of Austrian domestic staff …MM:  Were they refugees?
OC: I think so, yes, they were very nice.  I remember we had one girl, Maria, and she really was nice, I think she was Jewish, but they were refugees, and I’ll never forget I sold her a brown coat for 10s. a winter coat I had and she was so grateful.  And my mother, my mother used to send me the Dublin Independent and in it, in foil, she would post a quarter of cooked ham, and by the time the cooked ham got to East Sussex it would be past its pristine state but did we eat it.  And I used to go home, there were no nylons in England, and I used to come home, maybe F would pay my far home, I’d fly home for £11 return and that was a whole month’s pay but he’d pay my fare home to see him and I’d go back with several pairs of nylons and this was power, if you had nylons.
MM:  Were they freely available here?
OC: Yes, and the only place you got them in England was out of suitcases with spivs in Regent Street. So I used to bring back nylons to the pals and do great trade in that.  Really, when I think of it, and I still write to some of those people I was in the hospital with, it was very interesting.  But the rationing was fierce, a shilling’s worth of meat a week.
MM: What would that have been in weight?
OC:  Well I suppose it might have been half a pound of meat, one egg a week.  I don’t know what we ate.
MM: Vegetables?OC:  Vegetables, oh yes, we seemed to do all right you know, but it was very interesting and nobody, now the place I worked in was very interesting because there were an awful lot of people wanting to do courses and there was a lot of Australians and New Zealanders there.  And I loved seeing the interaction between the English and the New Zealanders and the Australians and they called them ‘colonials’.  Now they were grand to me and only once did somebody say something to me about us being neutral during the war and I said well I wasn’t old enough, you know, but it was an RAF hospital and of course there were Irish fellows in the RAF but they used to called these ‘colonials’.
MM: And was there a sense of superiority?
OC: Oh yes, and the Australians had such chips on their shoulders.  I remember there was an election while I was over there and I had a vote and the colonials didn’t.  I don’t know why, but the colonials didn’t and I’ll never forget it, parading around and I didn’t know who I was going to vote for and there was this list of Conservative and Labour and everything and I was having a great time laying them all off, and the colonials didn’t and I had a vote.
MM:  It must have been bitter for them because they had really contributed in so many ways to the war effort.
OC: Well, of course, the English didn’t like the colonials because they got invited to all the garden parties in Buckingham Palace and they’d go to their embassies and go up to these garden parties and they used to get to all these parties and go crowing about them after.  But I never had a chance of getting to a garden party with the Queen [laughs] or having tea with the Queen or whatever, so it was all very funny.  I enjoyed my time.MM:  How did the working regime compare?
OC:  Oh much freer.  The hospital had stretched ginormously on account of the Battle of Britain so the Canadians built a theatre; the Americans built a private ward.  It had originally been a cottage hospital.  We were all farmed out in houses around the town, houses were taken to rent.  Oh it was much freer, because a bus would call and collect you and bring up to the hospital for duty, oh it was much freer.  It was a revelation.  It was wonderful to have there instead of another ordinary hospital because there was a complete contrast and yet, the hospital I trained in, the surgeons would say oh you trained in the 
A hospital, that’s well known.  That place is well know and I used to trade on it like mad.  I’m sure they all thought it was about 500 beds or something but I never … I enjoyed that but the war was over, that was in 1948/49.
MM: So they were doing pioneering work?
OC: Well, they had been during the war because of the dreadful burns, you see, and they did wonderful hand surgery because the pilots, in the Spitfires, most of the pilots – their hands would be burned – and they used to do operations so they would come out of that with hands.  And we did wonderful work, we did great congenital deformities, really wonderful.MM: Were you nursing in the rehabilitation ward?
OC:  No, I was sometimes in the theatre but I never enjoyed theatre, because theatre is different altogether.  The patients; it’s all technical but I like to be with people.  But I did do theatre and they did wonderful pioneering work, I’d never seen anything like it before because, you know, this was the same as the Royal Victoria in Belfast, which is the best trauma hospital in the world because of the dreadful traumas they deal with in it, like field hospital, you know.  So it was very avant garde and we had this New Zealander who was in charge, Sir Archibald McIndoe and he treated the patients very informally.  The whole place was free and easy.MM:  Would that have applied to the admission policy, that if you needed medical treatment it didn’t matter whether you were an officer or other ranks?
OC: Oh no, no.
MM: Everybody was treated the same?
OC: Oh yes, well, you know, most of them had twenty or thirty operations by the time they got there, because they were in the Battle of Britain, which was 1940, I suppose and they were still coming back and you know, a lot of them, their faces were burnt and they had remade their faces and they were coming back to get grafts over years and years.  I still look at the Cenotaph every year and I see the “guinea pigs” marching by, and these were the men who were not much older than me and were in this place and were being treated and needed plastic surgery.  What use was it all, you wonder, but there you are. But then I came home and that was the end of my nursing career.  I got married and settled down [laughs].  That was that.
Olive, 3rd December 1996

OC1

