Pat, Dublin.  Interview: 18th November 2002.

PK:	My name is Pat K.  I was born on the 25th November 1925 in Crosby, Liverpool.  I have one sister and two brothers. 
MM:	And when did you come to Ireland?
PK:	I came to Ireland on holiday when I was about eight and then we stayed here when I was fourteen when the war started.
MM:	Was your family of Irish extraction?
PK:	Yes, my mother was from Carlow and my father was from Longford.  
MM:	And when did they go to England, do you know?
PK:	I think [pause] shortly before I was born, perhaps a year before I was born, yes.
MM:	You’re older than your sister then?
PK:	 Yes, I was the eldest, except for an older sister who died when I was about a month old.  She was sixteen months.
MM:	That must have been very hard for your parents.
PK:	It was dreadful, yes. 
MM:	When you were coming to Ireland just on holidays, was that to family here?
PK:	My uncle, yes, my mother’s brother, he lived in Carlow.  And then we came again in 1939 and while we were on holiday, the war broke out.  My father had gone back to England to go back to work and he wouldn’t let my mother or the rest of us return.  So we went to school.  I went – I had to cycle to Goresbridge to the convent, three miles every day.  I didn’t particularly like that.
MM:	Was this because you missed all your friends in England or that you didn’t like the school here?
PK:	I think it was cycling to school [laughs] and I wasn’t used to that, although I always walked to school and walked home but no, I didn’t particularly like it.
MM:	And it was a convent school?
PK:	Yes, the Brigidine convent.
MM:	Had you been at a convent school in England?
PK:	No, I was to go that year, 1939, in Crosby.
MM:	Being here and knowing the war was on in England, were you conscious of that as you went to school?
PK:	Oh yes, because my father was there.
MM:	What did your father do?
PK:	He was involved in some sort of banking at that time.
MM:	Was he called up?
PK:	No, my father was older – he was getting on for sixty, I think.  I can’t remember but he wouldn’t have [pause].
MM:	Yes, he wouldn’t have been called up.
PK:	I suppose he was about [pause] in his early fifties.
MM:	How did your mother manage?  Did your uncle have a family?
PK:	No, he was a bachelor.  Well I suppose I quite enjoyed it except for me having to go to school [laughs].  And my brothers went to the primary school in Borris.  I think that was it, otherwise we quite enjoyed ourselves.
MM:	And did you get to go over to your father at all during the course of the war?
PK:	Oh yes, we did.  On one occasion, we returned to England and my mother wasn’t very well, her nerves were very bad and my father sent us back again.  So we came back here again and that time then, I went to Kilkenny to a commercial school in Kilkenny and I stayed with a family that my mother knew.  
MM:	How old were you then?  About fifteen or sixteen?
PK:	About that, yes.  
MM:	And would the intention have been then that you would stay in Ireland to get a job?
PK:	No, when the war was over we were going to return to England and so I stayed in Kilkenny most of the time and I enjoyed that.
MM:	Was your father able to travel over?
PK:	Not really, no, and [pause] nobody was and we had these identity cards and it wasn’t very pleasant travelling between England and Ireland and it was also very unsafe.  This was because of the submarines and being bombed, it was very risky.
MM:	Of course, Liverpool was heavily bombed.
PK:	 Well, it was the sea, Mary, travelling on the sea.  Nothing ever happened to my knowledge, but there was always that danger.  And of course, then it was about three or four hours travelling to Liverpool.
MM:	Was it the threat of being bombed in Liverpool that made your mother so nervous?
PK:	Well, she was rather a nervous person anyway and she hadn’t had very good health and that used to worry my father, of course, when he was out and he might have been called out to [pause] I’m just trying to think what they called it.  The ARP.
MM:	Air raid precautions?
PK:	Yes, air raids and he didn’t like to have to go out and leave us either so that was all decided that we would go back.  And the second time, well, we did return to England and then I got a job.  I was a shorthand typist.
MM:	This was following your commercial course?
PK:	After returning, yes.  Well, I did continue with that in England as well and then I got a job and it was quite a good job – a nice place to work.  So, when you were eighteen, when one became eighteen it was either – you were conscripted into the factories or you could volunteer for the forces.  So I pleaded with my mum and dad to let me join the forces.  So, reluctantly, they did because I said I didn’t want to go into a factory and I didn’t either.
MM:	Was that because of the nature of the work or did the excitement appeal to you?
PK:	Well, I wouldn’t have liked the work but it did, yes.  So they gave in, they had to.
MM:	Which arm of the forces did you join?
PK:	I joined the ATS.  The Auxiliary Territorial Service or something like that [laughs].
MM:	And was that [pause] were you based in Liverpool or did you have to travel?
PK:	Oh not at all, they sent me to Scotland and it was the coldest winter.  It was a dreadful time.  We all thought we were crazy for volunteering because to go from comfortable homes to chalets, yes, wooden chalets.  You’d all go into the ladies room ([laughs] and there’d be all the hand basins and you’d to get on and get washed.  Oh, we often cried at night because you couldn’t do anything.  The last weekend, I think, we went to Edinburgh and that was the highlight.  And we had a lot of Polish camps around there too.
MM:	Were these people who had escaped from Poland?
PK:	Yes, people who had escaped from Poland, yes and then I was sent down to the south of England and that’s really where I enjoyed myself from then on.
MM:	What was the training like?
PK:	Pretty hard – being dished out with uniforms and everything was thrown at you and maybe what size are you and skirts and tops and bras and pants and stockings, and your greatcoat and cap.  And then we all slept in a chalet.  I can’t remember how many of us were in the chalet.
MM:	Were they from different backgrounds and different parts of the country?
PK:	Oh completely, yes, oh yes, definitely and of course, you wouldn’t like some of them but you had to put up with it.  But on the whole we enjoyed it.  Of course, the weather was so cold.
MM:	And what were you being trained to do?
PK:	March, exercise, get up early in the morning and go out to the [pause] get washed – we hadn’t any showers.  I think we were so tired, Mary, that we were just glad when it was all over [laughs].
MM:	And what were they expecting you to be able to do when you finished training?
PK:	Well, you would be sent to – everybody was sent [pause] even though some were very different, I think.  Actually, I was very friendly with a girl from where I came from.  She was an only child and I think she was quite shattered with the whole thing [laughs], she really was.
MM:	It must have been quite a shock to the system.
PK:	It was.  We were crazy but anyway, as I say, we finished there and I went to the South of England.  I went to Farnborough, in Hampshire.
MM:	Was that the RAF station?
PK:	Yes, right beside it.  It’s for training – you know, not the ordinary RAF at all.  Testing planes, that’s it.  There were all kinds and all shapes and lots of young men worked there.  I mean, civilians.  It’s still a famous place, Farnborough.  
MM:	What work did you do there?
PK:	I was secretary to a major.  He was the second in command of the regiment.  There was the colonel and then he was the second in command and I did his work.  He was a man, I think he must have been about fifty, and I got on very well with him and I had a very good time there.  
MM:	So the work was based on what you’d been trained to do before you went in to the army?  I mean, the army training wasn’t really related to it?
PK:	No, oh sorry, yes, I see what you mean.  But you had to be trained; everybody has to do that training, because you all had to march at some time or other.  At the training centre, we used to have to take our mugs, knife, fork, and spoon with us [laughs].  So at the station, then, I lived in a large house with about thirty girls, an old rambling house with grounds, and a couple of cooks and I enjoyed that.  It was all bare boards but very nice.  It wasn’t like living in a chalet.  [Both laugh].
MM:	What about the social life?  Did you make friends with the people you were working with?
PK:	Oh no, not those pilots at Farnborough, you’d never get to meet those pilots but yes, we’d have a couple of dances on camp and the RAF or the army, they’d come.  Or perhaps some Yanks occasionally and it was quite good but everything was finished, all the dancing was finished at ten o’clock because of blackouts and maybe an air raid.  But fortunately, that never happened there.
MM:	So you were being [pause] you’d decided on the forces but you still hadn’t been given much of a choice about joining up.  Did you feel that it had the better choice, rather than the factory work?
PK:	Oh definitely, definitely.  As I say, I was eighteen and everything was a bit of an adventure and I made some very good friends and really got to know people.  I could say I never met anybody I didn’t like, really, and I had a very good friend who was from Dublin I met later on.
MM:	She had joined up from Dublin?
PK:	From Dublin, yes.  She had joined up in Dublin and [pause].
MM:	Did she say why she’d wanted to do that?
PK:	No, although we were very good friends, I always felt that she wasn’t telling me something.  I did have some address and try to find out later but no.
MM:	You lost touch with her?
PK:	Yes.  She married an Englishman and she had always liked some Irish boy in Dublin but he never asked her to marry him.  She was quite upset about that so when this English boy asked her, she married him.  She went out to Germany and so that’s how I lost contact with her but she wasn’t happy.  I think she found out afterwards that the other boy liked her, the one in Dublin.
MM:	Irish men often don’t know how to say what they’re feeling.
PK:	Probably, probably.  
MM:	And did you ever meet any other Irish women who had joined up?
PK:	No, no.
MM:	And what about Irish men?
PK:	No, I don’t think I ever really did.  
MM:	What about the pay and conditions?  Would the money you were getting in the ATS compare well with what you would have been paid before joining up?
PK:	I think we were getting something like 25 shillings a week.
MM:	And was that all right?
PK:	It was all right because we had our keep and all our food and everything else so I suppose it wasn’t bad.
MM:	I’ve spoke to a woman in Belfast who went to work for the NAAFI about halfway through the war.  Northern Irish women - Northern Irish people weren’t conscripted but she had chosen to go because the money was about three times what she would have got in an ordinary job in Belfast.  Would you have been conscious of that in England - that the pay in the forces was better?
PK:	Not really, no. 
MM:	The kinds of [pause] did women stay on afterwards then, when the war was over, did any of them make a career of it?
PK:	Not that I knew of.  A lot of older, much older women, some of them were sergeant majors and when the war ended they were quite sad because they would have had no authority in civilian life, like they had in the army.  They really had quite [pause].
MM:	It is something that a lot of people that women experienced in wartime, that they were given to do things they were well able to do, that they were doing work that they would previously have been told was only men’s work, like in the factories.
PK:	That’s right, yes, but I hated this thing of – now even now, anything mechanical, it doesn’t interest me but if I was to be quite honest, it was a chance to get away from home [laughs].  Spread my wings [laughs].
MM:	Well, doesn’t everyone want to?  Had your parents any particular concerns about your joining up?
PK:	Oh they didn’t like it at all.  
MM:	Was that because they wouldn’t be able to see what you were up to or were they more generally worried?
PK:	Oh worried, they were quite worried.  That I would be caught out, maybe in an air raid and be killed, that was the thing.  But whether I lived at home or whether I was away, all dances finished at ten o’clock and you just came out and nobody would believe it, but it was just totally black.  And that was an awful worry for parents.  If I was about three minutes late my father used to be in an awful state about me.  I can understand all that now.
MM:	From the point of view of a parent, of course, but at the time I’m sure you thought he was fussing.
PK:	Of course I did, yes.  You have no fear at that age, whatsoever.  But it was marvellous to meet so many nationalities.  On a few occasions in Liverpool, I used to get tickets to go to this club in Liverpool and it was very interesting with all the different nationalities.  There’d be Danes, and the Poles, and some French; it was very, very good, yes.  
MM:	Were these people who had come to England to escape the war or to join up?
PK:	They were, yes.  They had actually joined up and they’d wear say the air force uniform with the country on the shoulder band, that’s how you knew what they were, yes.  They were always very nice.
MM:	Would you have had any opportunity to go abroad?
PK:	I was asked at the end of the war to go to Canada and [pause] my junior commander, she asked me would I like to go to Washington.  Washington where?  I said [both laugh].  Washington DC.  So I said I’d have to ring my parents so I rang home that night and my mother said, oh, this is very short notice.  I just knew she didn’t want me to go so I went back the next day and I told the junior commander.  I’ve often wondered what would have happened if I had gone there.  It would have been very nice.
MM:	Was this working with the embassy or just [pause]?
PK:	I never worked with an embassy.  
MM:	No, I meant was that what the job would have entailed?
PK:	I don’t know.  I couldn’t ask her any more.  She just – that was it.
MM:	And I suppose once you’d said no, you weren’t asked again.
PK:	No, definitely not.  But it was also coming to the time of demobilisation as well and I’d say it was about a year after that, I was demobilised.
MM:	What did that involve?
PK:	Oh, you’d go to a camp and hand all your uniform over and I suppose you’d get some pay.  Really, I don’t remember very much about it.  We were all wondering what we were going to do – life was going to be so different again [laughs].
MM:	And did you have to go home then to live with your parents?
PK:	I did, yes.
MM:	And was that difficult after being independent?  
PK:	A little bit, yes.  But there was that much [pause] I mean, there really was quite a bit of discipline.  I mean, you couldn’t stay out all night or you couldn’t [pause] I suppose I was more disciplined there than I was at home [laughs].
MM:	And what about finding work?  Were you given help with that or were you just left to fend on your own?
PK:	Well, you couldn’t pick and choose.  You had to take what they offered you and I worked locally and I didn’t like it and then after that, I went to work for agents of the Board of Trade in Liverpool and that wasn’t too bad.  But I wasn’t there very long when I decided to get married – to my childhood sweetheart.
MM:	So you met Louis when you were in Ireland?
PK:	Yes.  I met him when I was about sixteen.  My mother didn’t know [both laugh].  
MM:	And had you kept up a correspondence?
PK:	Yes, I used to write and tell him what I was doing, who I was going out and he used to do likewise [laughs].  
MM:	So how did you get together again, then?
PK:	I came over in [pause] I had a week’s holiday and I decided to come and see my uncle.  We met the following day and we got engaged before the week was out.  And I went home to tell my mum and dad.  That was September and we got married the following June.  
MM:	So it looked like you were going to marry somebody you’d only known a few days?
PK:	No, my mother knew [both laugh].  
MM:	To go back just a bit to when you were an English girl in an Irish town, given the background of the war and the history of Ireland and England, were you ever made to feel alien at school?
PK:	Oh, not at all, no.  The only subject I didn’t do was Irish.
MM:	But you were never made to feel that you weren’t wanted?
PK:	Oh  no; not at all, no.  
MM:	Because another one of my interviewees – when she was at school, she was given a very nationalist view of Irish history by her teachers and really, they’d been told, effectively they’d been told that England was the enemy and she had to get over this, to start accepting that it wasn’t true.
PK:	Yes.
MM:	Were you conscious as a teenager the fact that Irish news of the war was being censored?  Would you have been frustrated by the fact that it was hard here to find out what was happening, especially with your father still in England?
PK:	Well, all our correspondence between England and Ireland was censored but my uncle, he had a lovely radio and he was always turning to stations trying to get English news and we’d have a large map on the wall and we used to follow the war.  Really, I don’t know anything about war in that, Mary, I saw anything very bad.  I was very lucky.  Because at the end of our garden in Crosby, a bomb did drop there one night when we were away and there were about four houses demolished and in one air raid shelter, there had been eight children.  They came out of it okay but the bomb was as near as that [indicating wall of the room] and a couple of times, my father [pause].  Oh that’s right, I came back to England before my mother, that was it, and I was in the air raid shelter with him and you’d hear the doodlebugs going off and the ground, you’d feel the vibration.  My father used to go in for the lady next door.  There were two ladies living there; one was a teacher and the other lady was stone deaf and he’d go in.  He didn’t like it but he’d try, he’d make a lot of noise so that she’d see him and she used to come into the shelter.  She never heard anything but she knew when the ground was vibrating.
MM:	I understand that the most dangerous point was when they stopped – that the silence warned you it was going to drop.
PK:	Yes, that’s right.  They had seven nights in Liverpool, on the docks, and they dropped [pause] I forget now what they were but they were frightening things and they just ripped up all the homes.  Oh yes, Liverpool was very badly bombed and Coventry, and London.  I mean that was absolutely dreadful.  But they did say, I knew a few pilots, and one of them I knew said that they bombed Dresden and it was absolutely horrific what bombs they dropped on Dresden.
MM:	I think it was one of the worst bombing raids in the war, with no military target.
PK:	That’s right, that’s right.  But that was all revenge.
MM:	I suppose it’s understandable, if not excusable.
PK:	It is, it is understandable but I agree, it’s not excusable.  There were times, I suppose, when I did wonder are we going to win the war and if we weren’t, what was going to happen to us.
MM:	It would have been a very different world.
PK:	Oh it would, of course it would, yes.
MM:	I know that [pause] some of the women I have interviewed in Belfast, some of the women felt that the South of Ireland should be blamed for staying neutral – they resented the fact that they didn’t get involved.  Would you have had any feelings about that during the war?
PK:	Yes, I used to wonder, perhaps, why they didn’t.  Yes, I did think that at times.  My mother used to say that De Valera was right in not involving the country in it and I’d say she was asked quite often, that question.  But she was always well able to give her answer.  Yes, and I believe that, something that was written about all the ships that were bombed during the war, that if they could have got shelter around the coast of Ireland but of course, that was going to bring Ireland into it then.
MM:	Well, I’m not sure it would have made that much difference.  If a ship was being attacked out in the Irish Sea, the ports wouldn’t have been much help.
PK:	Yes, that’s right, yes.  
MM:	I think one of the reasons De Valera put forward was that we were too newly independent to risk any kind of alliance with Britain.  But then there were tens of thousands of Irish people who did join the war effort, or went to England to work.  So they clearly sympathised with the Allies.
PK:	Yes.  My sister in law was in the South of England and she was in insurance and she had to go into the factory.  I don’t know whether she liked it or not, being in a factory, but she was there for quite a while.
MM:	Would you remember whether you had to sign up, as what was called an alien, anyone who wasn’t from – wasn’t a citizen of the South of Ireland?  Of course, your mother was an Irish citizen.
PK:	And my father, yes.  I was always put down as British/Irish.  I don’t ever recall discussing anything like that with anybody; no, I don’t really.  
MM:	Were you [pause] people here did have rationing and they were very conscious of it.
PK:	Not like in England [laughs].
MM:	Exactly.  But was it a bit of a shock when you got to England and discovered how severe it was there?
PK:	Well, I remember when I came over to Carlow after that many years and they took me to a sweet shop in Carlow and I hadn’t seen so many sweets in years and I just didn’t know what to ask for, because you had a ration card in England you handed in the ration card and they just handed you out four ounces or two ounces of something.  You had no choice – you took what they gave you.  I mean, I don’t know of any hard times.  I didn’t have any hard times in the forces but my mother, and all the women had a hard time trying to keep a family fed.  It went on for a long time, even up to the time I got married, it was still there but, oh no, they were very hard times for the mothers.
MM:	I know some of my interviewees, from Belfast, thought that things were much easier in the South than anywhere else.  They’d come over the Border to stock up on things that weren’t as hard to get but the first thing they remarked on was light, because they thought it was very bright here.  So, although there was a blackout, it wasn’t anything like as strict as in the North and the U.K.
PK:	Well, it was quite ironic really, but while we were in Burris, bombs were dropped on Mount Leinster; German bombs and actually, what the pilot was doing was unloading the bombs.  He wasn’t quite sure where he was and a couple of people were killed and my father was saying my God, and I sent them away to keep them safe [laughs].  And then there was the bombing of the North Strand.
MM:	I don’t think it’s ever been made clear whether that was a mistake or what was behind it.  I’ve seen photographs and I understand that bystanders came from all over the country to have a look.
PK:	I’m sure, yes. 
MM:	Would you ever have travelled past Carlow when you were staying in your uncle’s place, on your own or with your mother?
PK:	No, I didn’t, except to go to Kilkenny when I was doing the course.  
MM:	And in Kilkenny, would you have been on your own, looking after yourself?
PK:	No, I stayed in [pause] what was the term?  Digs, I stayed in digs.  
MM:	So you weren’t really conscious then of the extent of rationing?
PK:	No, not really but I would have thought it was very bad.
MM:	Well, compared to England it wasn’t so much.
PK:	Well, when I went over to England after that, it was.  Everything was restricted.  Of course, I would hear them talking about when the flour was very bad, in Carlow, that it was very black, but I don’t remember that.
MM:	I think it was a sort of grey flour.
PK:	Yes, it was in that area but I don’t know.
MM:	I think it was that they weren’t using [pause] refining it as much.
PK:	Yes, that was it; that sounds right.  
MM:	I’ve seen letters that were written about rationing during the war, particularly in Belfast and the North, and they really resented the rationing, especially of fatty foods like butter.
PK:	Yes, I don’t know how the women managed to feed a family.  I remember my mother used to save up the coupons and she would get this tiny roast and that’d all be gone and there were no more for the week.
MM:	And did your family have an allotment?
PK:	Yes, my father did.  He had it during the war and it wasn’t too far away and he had it growing vegetables.  I suppose it meant a lot.
MM:	Well, at least it was fresh food.
PK:	Yes, it was, but butter, and margarine – my uncle, I don’t know how but he used to get margarine, maybe on the black market and my mother was just delighted – he brought a pound of margarine with him.
MM:	One woman told me a story [pause] she was a nurse who went to England towards the end of the war, her mother had wrapped her up a ham and sent it to her to the hospital where she was working.  By the time it reached her it was totally battered but she and her colleagues all fell on it, it was like a feast.  [Both laugh.]  But the rationing also extended to clothes.  Can you remember how that affected you?
PK:	Well, in my case, you see, I had the uniform and it was okay because I had that but it was always very nice to get into civvies.  That’s what I got when I was demobbed, I got £25, which was my demob money and I bought two suits with it.
MM:	Wow [both laugh].  
PK:	And they weren’t cheap, I can assure you, they were beautiful.  When you think of the price of the clothes now and the inferior quality.
MM:	You wouldn’t get much for £25 now, that’s for certain.
PK:	Oh not at all, not at all.  But there was always drink, there was never a shortage of that.  Always.  The pubs were always pub and I’m sure there was everything you’d have ever wanted.
MM:	Would that have been because pubs were a good focus for social life; that people could get together and forget about the war to some extent?
PK:	 Oh yes, that’s right.  Even at the dances in the camp, there’d always be a bar, but there again, as I said Mary, that was over at ten o’clock and I had to be in at ten thirty.  You were never out late.
MM:	Were the social occasions egalitarian occasions?  I mean, did all the soldiers come and mix with officers and so on?
PK:	Oh yes, all the dances were, oh yes.  None of that sort of thing.  They all came to the dances.  There was no such thing as the officers’ dance or the others, no.
MM:	What about catering?  Were there separate arrangements for meals?
PK:	Yes, the officers had their own mess but there again, as I said earlier, when I was in this lovely old house and we had a couple of cooks there, so it was very nice altogether.  Bu then towards [pause] before I left the army I went to Wiltshire and they were all chalets, right out in the country, and we were very isolated, quite isolated and we had a long distance to walk for a bus.  We were about seven miles from this town, Marlborough, which has a very well-known public school there, and on a Saturday, about six of us would get the bus into Marlborough and have chips and eggs and this was heaven to us.
MM:	I suppose eggs seemed more special since they were rationed?
PK:	Oh yes, but we’d then sit there in this lovely bay window and have the chips and the eggs and bread and butter and I think it amounted to 2/6.  [Both laugh.]  So, my husband, when he retired we went over and we went to those places again, revisited them and I went to this little tearooms and it had changed.  I was so disappointed that it had changed.  
MM:	It was a long time ago.
PK:	It was a long time ago but it was much nicer when I was young [both laugh].  It had this old curiosity shop look about it.
MM:	Sometimes it’s better not to go back.
PK:	It’s better not to go, yes.  My brother was with me, and his wife, and he was saying you used to come here every evening? and I said yes, I thought it was heaven [laughs].  
MM:	Sometimes it’s hard for me to imagine because we’re living in such prosperous times now.
PK:	Yes, I can see that.
MM:	One of the things that has come across to me is the extent to which women’s view of themselves has changed.  You were talking about the older women who wanted to go back, because they wouldn’t be in charge anymore, would you have felt [pause] been aware that maybe you were getting opportunities to do things that you mightn’t have done otherwise?
PK:	I don’t think so, no.
MM:	Well, most of the women, when they’re looking back, and it’s clear they were discriminated against in terms of pay and everything [pause].
PK:	Oh yes.
MM:	Well, they just accepted it.
PK:	Oh yes, but you see, I suppose I had a cushy number where a lot of the girls went to be ack ack and those girls, they had very tough lives where they were out, with some of the men too.  They were very hard.
MM:	Would this be because of the conditions themselves or because they were working with men who mightn’t have wanted them?
PK:	Well, of course, all the men were being sent away.  Really, the men you’d meet, they were either coming back from the war or about to go out.  But the women who drove the lorries; they drove them in convoys; they worked hard too.  
MM:	Were you ever asked if you’d like to go into that area of work?
PK:	Well, I couldn’t drive.  But I could have been trained.  That I would like to have done but it didn’t come up.
MM:	They were using the skills they knew you had, perhaps?
PK:	I don’t know but I would like to have done that, I know.
MM:	When you joined up, I take it that really you handed yourself over body and soul and you were told what to do after that?
PK:	Well, I think they sort of put you in what you were good at, perhaps.  Then when I went to the second camp, I still did the same kind of work but I didn’t work for any specific person, which wasn’t as nice.  You see, I was waiting to be demobbed so it didn’t really matter.
MM:	Were you asked if you wanted to stay on after the war?
PK:	Would I have liked to stay in the army?
MM:	Yes.
PK:	Well I suppose you could if you wanted to but everybody seemed as if they wanted to leave, yes.  It was actually where I was the second time that they were getting a college going and they were going to be there.
MM:	I know most of you were probably young and fairly healthy, but what provisions were made for health care for you?
PK:	We saw a doctor every month, a lady doctor every month.  
MM:	Was there ever discussion of specific aspects of women’s health – for instance, was contraception discussed or pregnancy?  I know there was a lot of concern about sexually transmitted diseases, for example.
PK:	I don’t know anything about that.  
MM:	Well, I know a lot of families had concerns, in fact it was even said in Parliament, that being in the armed forces would undermine a young woman’s reputation [both laugh].  
PK:	All I ever knew was that if somebody was discharged under Paragraph 11, we knew then that they were pregnant.  That was it but that only went up after they’d been discharged.
MM:	What about women who got married in the course of the war?  There seems to have been far more marriages.
PK:	One of my best friends, Joan, she met this young Canadian officer and they were married and shortly after that, he was sent out to France and Germany.  He was one of the first to go into Belsen.  Well, she used to just sit and write to him every night but when he did come back, his impressions of Belsen were very bad and I think it took quite a lot out of him, really.  But, I lost contact with her over the years and I wonder if their marriage broke up.  
MM:	Do you think the experience changed him too much?
PK:	Well, I don’t think so.  I wouldn’t think that had anything to do with it but that was the only girl I knew; she was one of my best friends.  They were married in London.
MM:	Was it a problem if you wanted to get married while you were in the forces?  Did you have to get permission?
PK:	For getting married?  I don’t think there was any problem.  I wouldn’t have known anybody else that got married; really, it was just the fact that she was one of my best friends.
MM:	Was there anything about that whole experience that you think might have changed your life, even on the level of how you thought about things?
PK:	No [pause], I suppose it thought me discipline.  
MM:	Were the hours of work demanding?
PK:	Oh not at all.  We started about nine to ten in the morning, in the office, and I suppose we finished about five o’clock.  It was more or less like civilian life that way.
MM:	Did you come across women who were going to be involved in more front line work- nurses, for instance?  Did you come across any of them who might have been shipped overseas?
PK:	We had what we used to call a sick bay and I had a very bad cold, I think, on my chest and I had to go there and they were nurses, they were the W.V.S. which was very nice when you were sick but [pause].
MM:	It sounds like it wasn’t that different from ordinary life, in many ways.
PK:	Oh yes, for me anyway, I had no complaints whatsoever.  When I went to the second place in Wiltshire and they were getting together this formation college and trying to get people ready for civilian life, we met artists and all trying to pick up where they’d probably left off, but that was good.  It was quite good.
MM:	Was there ever a point when you thought you might have been better off staying in Ireland until the war was over?
PK:	No. 
MM:	Even though you knew you would be conscripted?
PK:	No, that didn’t worry me at all.  I suppose because up to then that had been my life and my home and actually, all my father’s relations were there and I was fairly close to the cousins too.  I met a lot of people and I thought I’d seen it all.  [Both laugh.]  Which I hadn’t, of course.
MM:	And when you married Louis then you came here.
PK:	We stayed in Carlow for about two and a half years and then we came up to Stiles Road – that was our first home in Dublin.  So we’re fifty two years married  [laughs].
MM:	That’s quite an achievement.
PK:	Quite an achievement, yes [laughs].


Pat Interview, 18th November 2002

PK1

