Sally,  Dublin. Interview: 8th June 2000.

(1,482 words removed at Sally’s request.  They dealt with the history of her family.)

SG:	I was the oldest, yes.  Then I had two brothers and a sister.
MM:	So which school was it that you were going to?
SG:	That was a private school in [pause] called Norfolk College.  It was right up at the Church of the Three Patrons.  You know the Three Patrons - in Rathmines.  Well, we lived then just about six houses up.  We moved further up nearer the top of the road later on.  The boys went to the national school and I went to the private school.
MM:	Why did that happen? 
SG:	I suppose [pause] I think it was because of distance really [pause] I was two years older than my brother and the nearest school was in Winton Avenue, off Rathgar Avenue there.  It was a Methodist school, I think it was Methodist run but it was a national school and the two boys went there.  And then my sister came along, and then she went to Diocesan College and I stayed in the Norfolk College until I was sixteen and then I went to Alexandra College to finish.
So, my father [pause] I wanted to be a nurse although I wouldn’t dream of it now, but anyway I wanted to be a nurse and he said, you know, I think you’re cut out to be a teacher.  I used to love helping the others with their homework and I think he felt that I was cut out to be a teacher and he said why don’t you do that but I wanted to be a nurse.  So I went around hospitals and saw matrons and [pause] on my own, you know, you wouldn’t do that now.  Walk into the Rotunda Hospital and say you wanted to see the Matron.  In the Adelaide you want to see the Matron!  Well, I was put off.
MM:	Really? On what grounds?
SG:	I don’t know.  I began to think [pause] the atmosphere or something, I don’t know what it was.
MM:	I think it was quite tough.  A lady who gave me an interview was a trainee nurse in the Adelaide.  Now she did go through it and she actually went to Britain as a nurse during the war, but it was very, very hard and really they were treated pretty badly.
SG:	Yes, I think they were.  Anyway, I got a feeling that no, I don’t think this is for me.  Maybe it was the approach that the Matrons took, I don’t know. [Laughs]
MM:	It does seem to have really been quite hierarchical.  You know, that those who were qualified could lord it over the juniors.
SG:	I was very glad I didn’t end up following that in the end.  I remember at Christmas I got a little blackboard and chalk and I remember propping this up in my bedroom like a classroom and teaching.  Then when I got my first job and I had the chalk in my hand and I went up to the blackboard, this was what I was dreaming about, you know. [Laughs]  I don’t know how it was that my father said go into the teaching, it was national school teaching, you see and I had no Irish but I don’t know why I went [pause] I remember going down to Kildare Street and seeing the headmaster there and from being in college, Alexandra finishing, I went back to school and had to take exams.  And in a year I had to cram in all this Irish.  My father got me special tuition.  
MM:	Was this the State exam for primary school teachers that you had to do?
SG:	Yes, you had to have Irish to teach in the national schools.  Of course, I didn’t pass it.  I think my father was disappointed.  So then I went to train in Alexandra, they were doing Froebel training, that’s what I should have gone for in the first place.  That was grand.  I did the Froebel training and after the year, it was very comprehensive, we got all sorts of angles on teaching.  It was lovely; I loved it.  We went out to different schools and took different classes.  I remember a little school up in a home in Ballsbridge or somewhere.
MM:	Were there many schools using the method at that stage?
SG:	No, it was really an English thing but most of the people who [pause] well, some of them did, some of them got jobs in Ireland but it was the Montessori thing, you know, Froebel.  So I did the year and at the end of the year the headmistress sent for me and she said she had a friend, a doctor who had come back from China and had a big family and was living in Harrowgate and was looking for somebody to look after [pause] to tutor his kids, you know.  So there were six of them.  There were three big boys, one of them was at public school and the others were at local school and then there was another little boy and two little girls.  Well, I didn’t do any teaching.  I was like a nursery maid but I loved it, because I loved the family.  He was Irish but I didn’t care very much for her, she was English, but he was Irish, he was full of fun and used to take us around in the car on a Sunday.
MM:	So you moved to Harrowgate?
SG:	I did.
MM:	Were you nervous about it?
SG:	No, I never was nervous, I never was in crisis.  I never get worked up, I take it all and then afterwards I think did I.
MM:	Were you nineteen or twenty at the time?
SG:	Yes, I was nineteen or twenty, that’s right, yes.  And I loved it, taking the children to school and playing with them.  Then they had another girl from Alexandra who came over for the boys to go with them for tennis and all that carry on, horse riding and I stayed with the younger three.  But I began to see that it was going nowhere.  I mean these kids were going to go grow up and I wouldn’t have a job.  So the headmistress came to Harrowgate for treatment or something and of course, she called on me to see how I was getting on.  I told her I was very happy but I’m not getting any teaching, I want to teach.  So she understood quite well.  So I told the parents I didn’t want to stay.  So my father came over for me and I came back to Dublin.  My father died about two years afterwards – that would have been 1932 – he died in 1933.
MM:	And how old were you when that happened?
SG:	Just turned 21.  He had given me a twenty first birthday party with my friends. Every Friday my parents used to go to the cinema in Rathmines. When the talkies came [pause] my mother used to suffer from deafness and she couldn’t handle it at all so I used to go with my father and we were close.  Much closer than my mother.  My mother, I don’t think she was close to any of us.  She was very, you know, domineering, matter of fact, you know.  Very keen on saving and economy and my father was the opposite altogether.  She used to say if it wasn’t for me they’d all be in the poorhouse.  
MM:	Did she run the family finances?
SG:	Well, no, no she didn’t but she was always exercising thrift.  If you left a light on in your room she’d say there you are, burning your father’s money.  You know, that kind of thing.
MM:	What did your father do for a living? 
SG:	He was in the rag trade.   He was a representative.
MM:	So he would have been reasonably well paid?
SG:	He must have been.  He delved a lot in the stock exchange [laughs].  
MM:	Was he a gambler?
SG:	I think he made a bit and there’d be rumours about the gold mines in South Africa or something and I think he did that.  Because we went on wonderful holidays when none of my school mates were going on these holidays, they’d be going down to Rush or Skerries or somewhere, we’d be off to Wales, South Wales and that kind of thing.  And then we used to go to Malahide, of course and Greystones and other places.  Oh yes, he threw money around an awful lot.  When he’d get a flush he’d go and spend it and my mother was always saying now Daddy.  But no, she didn’t know anything about business because, when he died, I had to step in and get in touch with the stock broker, the solicitor, the bank and all that kind of thing.  She didn’t know a thing.
MM:	So she hadn’t worked outside the home?
SG:	No, she’d never worked at anything.  
Indecipherable section.
SG:	I lived for a time in Rathgar in various flats and I stayed with somebody whose husband had gone to war and she had a number of children and she wanted somebody but then I got a flat of my own.  And then my friend, my school friend, came to me one day and said she was joining up.
MM:	Were you teaching all this time?
SG:	No, I was teaching in St. Andrews Prep in Rathgar, that’s when the war broke out.  So she said would you join up? I said, I couldn’t do that because I was looking after this property that was still in our family that had been left to my grandmother, down Sandymount way, it wasn’t a huge property but it had to be looked after.  Repairs had to be seen to and I had the overheads to pay, the ground rent and the usual [pause] but I had a great friend in my solicitor, he was a great friend of my father’s and he was like a father to me and whenever there was a crisis with the boys, I’d go down to him.  Weep on his shoulder and tell him I can’t cope with this, you know [laugh].  But he was wonderful.  So then, my brother got married, the other boy was in the air force and my friend was joining up so I went up to my friend and he said, go on, we’ll look after the property, we’ll manage.  So that’s what happened.  
Indecipherable section. 
SG:	I simply just left for Belfast and then we were sent up to barracks in Ballymena.  So everybody went on three weeks training, to learn barracks square and battle and all this kind of thing and then you were asked what you wanted to be.  You could either be, in those days, you could either be a cook, a clerk or an orderly so I said I wanted to be a cook.
MM:	Was that because you were a good cook?
SG:	Well, I did not want [pause] although I had done secretarial.  My father said when I took up the teaching, he said I don’t think there’s going to be any money in this, not in Ireland, you know, too few people want this kind of teaching, he said I think you should do something else.  So I took classes with Miss Galway’s Secretarial College in Dorset Street and did secretarial and shorthand typing and you know, but I didn’t want to do that, oh no.  Stuck in an office, oh no.  So anyway, I became a cook and was put into the kitchen and put to peeling potatoes and brussels sprouts.
MM:	This was still in Ballymena?
SG:	In Ballymena, yes.  We were in the castle, attached to the Royal Ulster Constabulary, they were based there [pause] I was getting restless then, you know, just pottering around the kitchen so one day, I was scrubbing out the yard and the officer came to me.  She said how would you like to come over and look after four officers in the Officers’ Mess.  So I did that, I went over there and I did all the shopping and [pause] and then one day, she came to me and said what were you in civvie life.  I told her I was a teacher.  A teacher, she said, you’ll want to get out of this [laughs].  So I said gladly [laughs].  She said, what about going on a course and she told me about the course.  Well, I got myself in the kitchen, it was a big kitchen, with another corporal for a while, and there was a course going at the time whereby they assessed [pause] the recruits coming up were assessed mentally.  They had a matrix test; did you ever hear of a matrix test?
MM:	No.
SG:	You get pages and pages of questions.  You have to answer as many questions in as short a time as you can; you know the kind of thing.  And it’s graded and you can’t say, I want to be this or I want to be that, you were graded.  So I thought it would be nice to do that, so she said she would get me to do it.  
Indecipherable section.
SG:	You’d have to be on a par with her.  So I was told to rush upstairs and stick the stripes on to my uniform and come downstairs to work [laughs].  And she’d be cursing and [pause] from the very beginning she was a domineering [pause] and she knew everything, sort of thing and I had to pretend I knew everything [laughs].  How do you make a rice pudding, she’d say.  So I told her the way my mother made a rice pudding, I’d never seen any other way of getting a rice pudding made so I told her how she’d get the enamel pie dish and then she got a little bit of water and put it in the oven to swell the rice and when the rice was swollen [pause] we had this great big round dixie and I put in the rice, put in the water and put it in the oven and then when they were ready, they were stacked, you see, the dixies were stacked.  So she said who thought you how to make rice pudding [laughs] and I said my mother [laughs] but anyway, I got through that.  
And then I was put in charge of the rations and that meant we had to go to Ballymoney a few times a week with the lads from the regiment.  There were three or four trucks and then there was Americans arrived and the Americans used to go and pick up their rations.  And then I was in charge of the stores, giving out the rations and somebody had to be there to check the ration books and go off in the lorry to collect the rations.  When I left Ballymena [pause] another officer came down to me one day and she said would you like a break?  There’s a vacancy in Bangor, in County Down, and these are officers that have come back from [pause] you know, they’ve been demobbed, they’ve done their stint and they were billeted in the Bangor school.  And we were [pause] they took over the hospital, no, Bangor school had taken over the hospital and they were all doctors and we were billeted in the castle, we were at the top of the castle and the next floor was the Officers’ Mess.  The next floor was the rank and file, they were outside; they took over the whole area.
MM:	And would they have been demobbed before the war was ended?
SG:	Well, they’d done their stint and they were coming, you know, they had done their length of service and they were just hanging on waiting to be gradually demobbed, you know. It was just before the war was over.  
Indecipherable section.
I was in Ballymena and that night we got the word to get into the trenches.  You had to jump into your greatcoat, get on your helmet, get your gas mask and into the trenches.  But we weren’t bombed in Ballymena.  
MM:	Were you involved at all in the operation to clear up after the Blitz?
SG:	No, no.  The first air raid was before I went up and then the second air raid was when I was in Ballymena.  In Ballymena, no Bangor, you know, as these officers were demobbed, you would see less and less of them.  There were nurses and doctors and a mixture of Japanese and Germans, Chinese and whatnot, all in together and I was in charge of the Officers’ Mess in Bangor Castle and I had a couple of Germans as orderlies, to look after the officers.  And these two, I got very fond of them and I used to go on my bike, I had my bike up there, I used to go into the town at weekends and the officers would give you so much for Mess money and you would go round the farms getting eggs or something that you didn’t get on the rations, you know.  They were still doing the rations then.
MM:	Surely that was slightly black market [laugh]?

This interview was continued on a second tape, which was stolen, along with my transcriber machine.  I asked Sally if she would be willing to do another interview, to cover the period described in the stolen interview but she was unwilling.  She said she had not realised to what extent she had ‘run on’ in the original interview and she asked me to delete certain parts of the transcript relating directly to her family.  She was agreeable to my taking notes about our conversation but she did not want to be taped.  

Sally was promoted to sergeant and was appointed as quartermaster.  Her duties included ordering in supplies, allocating the correct rations and having to administer the various ration books to make sure the rations were distributed accurately.  She was the only woman in the barracks at the time who was given trousers for her uniform, although the dress uniform at the time included having to wear a skirt.  This was because of the nature of the work that she was doing.  When she had ordered in supplies she would often have to lift in sacks of potatoes or vegetables and it was reckoned that trousers were necessary for the work she was doing.  She did have a man working with her but generally she was fairly isolated.  She remarked on how this was a pattern through most of her working life in that she found she was working on her own and that she operated better as a self starter.  Sally referred to the fact that they had to wear uniform for a pay parade and for any kind of ceremonial duties.  

Sally did think of continuing in the army after the war and would have been given the opportunity to do it but family circumstances prevented her doing this.  An aunt became sick and she returned to Dublin after the war from Wales, where she had moved from Northern Ireland.  She had worked in England as well, and enjoyed that but that was before the war.  One of the reasons that she joined up was not just because her friend asked her, but because she was very influenced by Churchill’s speeches.  

While she was in Ballymena and Bangor Sally said she never encountered any resentment because she was from Éire.  She remembered that a fellow sergeant with whom she became very good friends was actually anti-Éire and anti-nationalist and resented many of the southern workers who came north in search of work and was quite dismissive of them.  But she seems to have excluded Sally from this category, possibly because she was Protestant.  She remarked on the large numbers of people who had gone to Northern Ireland and she referred to some of the junior workers in the canteen, doing menial jobs with no chance of promotion.  She actually said it was good enough for them, not in a dismissive way but saying that they were happy enough with the work so long as they were being paid because the pay was much better for that kind of work than it would have been in Éire.  

Sally Interview: 8th June 2000




SG1

