Sheila, Dublin.  Interview: 5 April 1998

SC:	My name is Sheila and my date of birth is 28 June 1936.
MM:	Since we will mainly be talking about your mother, working during the war period, and your remembrances of that as a child, would you just give me your mother’s name and date of birth, please?
SC:	My mother’s name was Mary O’Connor and her date of birth was 20 January 1899.
MM:	Do you know anything about your mother’s circumstances, where she was born and what sort of family she was born into?
SC:	She was born, her parents came from Wexford, and they were relatively well off.  She was born [pause] they actually [pause] I’m trying to remember now [pause] it doesn’t matter if I sort of hmm and haw a bit?  They were born [pause] he came, her father, came to Dublin and sort of had got his portion of the farm in Blackwater, and he had several businesses and unfortunately, he was an alcoholic and he drank them out of them all, so it was a pretty rough upbringing for a young woman, you know, it really was.  I think [pause] I don’t think Mammy really got very much schooling, as a result, you know it was sort of [pause] I don’t really, she never spoke about it but I’ve seen a photograph of her, standing in the doorway of a shop that they actually had in Clambrassil Street at the time, it was like something like 1910, like really dorny looking.  It wasn’t a very good upbringing.
MM:	And would she have been expected to work in the shop, do you know?
SC:	I imagine so but I don’t know, I don’t know.
MM:	So when she came to Dublin, or [pause] that she was in Dublin did she get [pause] do you know anything about when she got married, what age she was?
SC:	She got married round about 1923, so she would have been 24, and my father was about three years older than her.  He was in good circumstances because he was a cooper in Guinness’s, which was one of the best-paid trades in Dublin at the time and they were relatively well off, until the time that he had the stroke.  They were really on the pig’s back, as they used to say in Dublin, you know.
MM:	So when she got married, and your father had a good steady job, what did they do for accommodation?
SC:	They initially lived in a sort of [pause] they shared a house in Richmond Road, and then they bought, theirs was one of the first houses built - Dublin Corporation/Council houses, built by the Town Commissioners in Marino - and you could either rent them or rent/buy them and they rent/bought them and everybody told them they were mad.  In those days, you know, you didn’t buy a house, you lived in one unless you were very wealthy.  But through all her troubles, she continued to buy it, which was, you know, I think a tremendous achievement for her, because they, once Daddy had the stroke, there was little or no money coming in.  But she somehow managed to keep on to the house and everybody was saying, you should sell it, but she wouldn’t.  She was an amazing woman.
MM:	And in terms of your family, where did you come in the family, how many children did she have?
SC:	Seven altogether, and I was the youngest.  There were four girls, three boys, and unfortunately the three boys all died at some stage.  You know, one was stillborn, one died at about ten months I think, from measles, and then my brother, who was the apple of her eye, was killed in 1944, aged eighteen.  So she really had, she really had problems.  But she came through them.
MM:	So this was Dublin in the 1930s [pause] would you know anything about the sort of healthcare she was having when she was having the children?
SC:	She was lucky in that Daddy worked in Guinness’s; so the healthcare there was for free, so you know, she was very fortunate.  Now, whether Guinness’s paid for the childbirth or not, I don’t know, but I know the first child she had, she was booked into the Coombe, and she went in and it was a false alarm, and while she was there, there happened to be a black doctor [laughs] and she never went back to the Coombe, she said no black man was going to touch her.  So all the rest, everybody else was always born at home and I presume the local G.P. and midwife [pause] I don’t know.  I was born at home.
MM:	In terms of growing up, you say your Daddy had a stroke, when would that have been in relation to your development, what age were you when it happened?
SC:	I wasn’t born.  It was [pause] he had the stroke round about the Christmas before I was born - I was born in the June.  So I mean, it was traumatic, you know, I mean to say at that stage she still had Desmond, so she had four children already, and I was the fifth alive, you know, so there was no money coming in apart from a minute amount.  Guinness’s in those days were remarkable, because they had what we call a prolonged disability income.  Now it was tiny, but nonetheless, it was all that was coming; there was no social welfare, there was nothing in.  And, I was born in June, and Mammy went out to work when I was eleven months old.  You know, so I mean, it was just amazing.
MM:	And what did she do?
SC:	She worked as a cleaner in Guinness’s.  I mean she had never worked, as such, so she had no training before she was married, so she was lucky that Guinness’s used to look after, you know, anyone in certain circumstances, of their own, in Mammy’s circumstances, and they looked after her by giving her a job, the only job she could take on.
MM:	And what about the conditions of that job?  I know of somebody else in a similar case who went in very early.
SC:	I think it was probably very, very hard.  I know for a fact that she had to leave Marino at half four in the morning to walk to the Brewery, because there were no buses at that stage, you know, and she certainly never rode a bike in her life.  So she walked, and she probably got the bus back.  I can’t [pause] I was trying to remember, I don’t know if she had [pause] I think she probably had to be in for six, but maybe it was six thirty, and as far as I know, she did three hours.  But it meant getting up at half past four, and leaving the baby at home, so Gwenny, my eldest sister, more or less was half rearing me.  
MM:	How old was Gwenny at that stage?
SC:	At the time that Mammy went to work, Gwenny was fourteen.
MM:	She little more than a child herself.
SC:	She was, exactly, yes.  But there was one good thing about it, it was that my father was always there, so there was always a responsible, reasonably responsible adult in the house, you know, and so that, in so far as like baby minding, you know, she had no problem there, that Daddy was always there.
MM:	Well, your father couldn’t work.  How incapacitated was he?
SC:	He was completely paralysed down the left side, completely, and I think [pause] I think that his brain might have been slightly affected.  I don’t know whether it was that, or whether it was frustration, because I remember, not rows with my mother, but rows with my brother.  It was very sad, I think that Daddy was just frustrated, that he couldn’t do the things [pause] he was still a young man.  He couldn’t do what he did [pause] because he was always, the house, he did everything you know, building and all that sort of jazz.  He was a very, very active man and, you know, I think the frustration of it.  It was only when Desmond died that Daddy sort of calmed down, and I think realised [pause] you know.
MM:	And your mother’s routine, apart from starting at half past four in the morning, how many hours then, three or four hours in Guinness’s, and could she have got a bus back home then to start the domestic work?
SC:	Yes, and she’d do her shopping on the way home.  She used always shop in Thomas Street, then she’d come and she’d step into [pause] I mean, looking after the family.  Marie would have been six then, Kathleen would have been eight, and Desmond probably about twelve or thirteen and Gwenny, fourteen.  So she still had a young family, which demanded, really needed all her time.
MM:	And what about when you were going to school, as you said, they were all young.  Who got them ready for school? Was that Gwenny?
SC:	No, because by the time I was going to school, Gwenny was working and it was [pause] I remember the very first day I went to school, my brother brought me to school, so I distinctly remember that.  I suppose everybody remembers their first day at school, no matter how small they were, and it was really Daddy would sort of supervise.  I remember Daddy brushing my hair, I’d sort of curly hair, and pulling the comb through it, you know [laughs] so I do remember that he was involved in that and getting me ready for school, I don’t know about the others.
MM:	And as you were growing up, and you’d had your whole life with an incapacitated father, and a mother who took the role of breadwinner, which was unusual for the time, how did that make you feel in terms of your contemporaries?
SC:	Oh, I don’t know how they managed it, but we never, ever felt deprived.  I never felt deprived [pause] we always felt very special.  I don’t know how she managed it, but we never [pause] and I mean we had very little [pause] but then most other people didn’t have a lot during the war years, either, you know, with rationing and all that sort of [pause] so probably, things were a little bit more level between, you know, people who were in good jobs, civil service or whatever.  We mixed with all sorts; we certainly didn’t feel we had to touch the forelock to anybody [laughs].
MM:	I meant really in terms of maybe the authority structure in the house [pause] that at the time, it was still considered very much a hierarchical thing, that the father was head of the household.  Would there have been suggestion that your mother took that over because she was the one out at work?
SC:	I don’t think so really, because I have no recollection [pause] I’m thinking of my contemporaries, and I have no recollection of the fathers being head of the house, it was always the mothers.  The mother was always the forceful person, of anybody that I can remember, you know, of people living around us.  I don’t every remember fathers, sort of, coming in and everybody waiting on them, or maybe it was because of my circumstances that I chose to see everybody else in relation to my own, you know.
MM:	An interesting aspect of that is that the social emphasis was on the father as head of the household, but em, especially in working class areas, it was the women who were really running things.  You know, it was done quietly.
SC:	But ours was a very mixed area, it wasn’t [pause] I wouldn’t say it was purely working class.  It was really a very mixed area, you know, so that, as I say, we never felt [pause] we never felt that Daddy was pushed to one side, although he probably was, but I always remember him as a strong presence, he was an amazing person too.  He was always there, Mammy would be gone out in the morning and Daddy would be there, like.  If I wasn’t well, and couldn’t go to school, or it had maybe the day before been decided that I wasn’t well enough to go to school, the next day it was my Dad that wrote the note for school [laughs].  So it might have been very easy, I was never conscious that [pause]
MM:	It sounds like it might have been more ideal that a lot of families?
SC:	Yes, we were never conscious [pause] we were never made conscious of the fact that my poor mother had to go to work [pause] it was only afterwards that I felt that.  You know, she made no bones about it, just got on with it.
MM:	And given that, as a cleaner in Guinness’s, she wouldn’t have been earning very much, and the pension was very small, his disability, what other strategies did she use to survive economically, if you like?
SC:	She kept hens, she grew potatoes, she grew everything.  She grew lettuce, we had apple trees, she was amazing in that way and I mean we always had fresh eggs, so that we were quite well fed.  Funny, I remember my sister, I remember Marie saying that, you know, when things were probably quite bad, that she remembers the actual slices of bread being rationed.  Like, Mammy would butter the bread on the table and there were two slices each, but I don’t remember that, I really don’t.  I must have been maybe sheltered, I don’t know, but I don’t remember that.
MM:	Do you think maybe because you were younger that they were giving you a larger share?
SC:	No, I don’t remember, I just don’t remember that.  I remember Marie saying that, but I don’t remember it, and I mean, we never sort of had luxuries, but we always had enough to eat.
MM:	And what about clothes?
SC:	She made most of our clothes, she certainly made all my clothes.  She even at one stage used to make my nickers [laughs] and made out of bits of [pause] I remember having a pair of purple nickers [laughs].  They were made out of bits of material that she had accumulated.  She used to go to Switzers White Sale and she’d buy these remnants and things like sheets, she never bought sheets.  Gwenny worked in a flour factory in Ringsend, and she was able to buy the flour bags and she used to stitch them up and make sheets out of them.  They were like linen, you know, they lasted for ever. 
MM:	Did she have a sewing machine to do this?
SC:	Yes, she was very good, she was a brilliant seamstress.
MM:	Given that she was going out to work early in the morning, she was then doing the shopping and coming home and doing the domestic chores, and all this extra - growing vegetables and making your clothes, did she ever relax?
SC:	She did because at the stage when I would be remembering things, you know, the house was always full, because Gwenny was in the Guides and Desmond was in the Scouts.  The house was always full, and I mean, it was nothing to Mammy to make a huge big apple dumpling, say, and that would go on the big table, with maybe twelve or thirteen people to supper, you know.  So, she did, and she loved that, she loved company.  Games of cards, you know, lots of people played cards, we all played cards around this big table.  Yes, she did, I don’t know where she got the time, Mary,  I honestly don’t.  I couldn’t face into it now.
MM:	From what I know of your family, you’ve all developed either artistically or creatively in some way.  Would that have been encouraged by her or do you think you just picked it up from her incredible activity?
SC:	I think it was probably from her activity, really, because we never sort of were taught anything, music or dressmaking.  We did, from watching my mother, I used to dress-make, and my sisters, they went on and gave courses in dressmaking.  Probably from [pause] I remember really lovely dresses that we had, you know, summery type dresses, always made by Mammy.  And then we knitted; I remember I used to knit my own socks.  This was when I was quite [pause] this was during the war, when if you didn’t knit your socks, you didn’t have socks.  It was just incredible when you look back on it.
MM:	You would have been still quite young during the war years.  Were you aware of things like rationing actually being a problem?
SC:	Not being a problem, nothing [pause] I mean my poor mother probably saw all the problems, but I mean, I remember going with her to Liptons every week to collect the rations, and they’d ration out the sugar and the butter and they’d shove it into brown bags, you know, and butter, and whatever else was rationed.  And em, we used to, this was my mother again, margarine - you’d mix the margarine with butter to make the butter go further, you know.  Many’s the time she put butter on the range to soften it and of course, we’d forget about it (both laugh).
MM:	That was the end of it.
SC:	Yeah, exactly, yeah. 
MM:	Going into town to Liptons, for instance, would you have walked or would you bus?
SC:	No, we would have gone on the bus.  In fact, I probably, it was probably when I was a bit older that I would have gone in to Liptons on my own, it was Liptons in Dame Street, to get the rations, because Mammy herself would be on her way down from the brewery and that’s probably why our rations were there.  I remember going in with her into the place, I forget the name of it, some mills or other in Talbot Street, to get food for the hens, you know, the pinhead oatmeal for the little chickens, she used to maybe order up fifty day-old chicks from Carlow and they’d come up on the train and she’d go in and collect them.  She’d rear them.
MM:	She just carried a box of chicks home? 
SC:	Yes, because they weren’t delivered.  They’d be in a box, like, with little day-old chicks pushing their beaks up.  But the neighbours also used to bring their scraps to the hens, that was probably, you know, just to help out.  You know, sort of potato peelings, things like that, but you know, this was routine.  As I was growing, this was routine that Mrs. Keyes would send in [pause] it was nothing, it wasn’t charity or anything, she was just using her scraps and they went out to the hens.
MM:	Was there any sort of exchange, that your Mam would give her eggs?
SC:	No, no.  I remember another thing she used to do, and this is just between ourselves, I mean, working in Guinness’s, she always had her black shopping bag and everyday that shopping bag was half-full of Guinness’s barley - they were barley-fed chickens [both laugh].  Not to talk about the kindling and everything else that went along with it [both laugh].  She was a woman of many parts.
MM:	Did she get her pint of stout from Guinness’s as a worker?
SC:	I think she could have done, but I don’t remember her ever talking about it.  Mammy didn’t drink Guinness, she may have occasionally brought home a bottle of stout to Daddy, but I don’t remember.  
MM:	I know of people who used that as part of a barter system, because they didn’t drink Guinness themselves but it was always useful to swap.
SC:	Well, maybe she did get it and bartered it with some of the men, because Mammy didn’t drink.  She probably did and went about and did it and didn’t talk about it.  But I can see the black shopping bag, half full of barley, you know.  [Both laugh].
MM:	I know of another woman who worked in Guinness’s as a cleaner, and found it became too much in terms of the child-rearing so she started to take the cleaning home.  Your Mam never did anything like that?
SC:	No, no [pause] what was it, washing that she would take home?  No, she actually was [pause] I remember her saying that her first day in Guinness’s was on her knees, scrubbing and that was in 1937, and she ended up forewoman herself, but in those days, even forewoman was a four-hour job.  They’d run their fingers along the top of the shelf and if there was dust there, you were in trouble, but everything was scrubbed on your knees, there were none of the modern aids, which she had later, in the late fifties and sixties.
MM:	And would you have any idea how much she was actually paid?
SC:	No, Mary, I know it was very little, but I really don’t know.  I mean it would have been just a couple of pounds.  It couldn’t have been more.
MM:	Recently, I was looking at tables for food prices during the war, and a loaf of bread went up as high as 3/6 at one stage, which if you were earning £2 a week, was a lot, you know.  Would she have made her own bread as well?
SC:	Yes, she would make bread.  We had shop bread, because I distinctly remember after the war, maybe when rationing finished, that the first day we got white bread.  We were probably better off with the other stuff, but I can see it at this big table, and comparing the white bread and the old bread, which was a sort of beigy colour, you know.  But we did have shop bread [pause] but Mammy made her bread, she made apple tarts, redcurrant tarts, everything, she baked, baked, baked all the time, as well as everything else.
MM:	Was she unusual in the sense of the sheer range of her activity, or would you have noticed other children’s mothers doing the same kinds of things, maybe not all of them?
SC:	Well, they all baked, everybody baked, and everybody was very, very careful.  My mother would send me down to the butcher’s on Malahide Road for 6d worth of pieces and that would be 6d worth of steak pieces, but in those days, I mean, that made a stew for the family.  But nobody, nobody flashed money around, because I think they just didn’t have it.  You know, even though some people, like, where we were living were in relatively good jobs, you know, sort of white collar jobs, which would be regarded, because they were white collar, they’d be better than [pause] even though somebody who was a tradesman was in a way to make a lot more money, but em, I’m just thinking of the neighbours around.  Nobody else kept chickens or anything like that she [pause] everybody baked, everybody made clothes, made clothes for the children and knitted.  I mean everybody did that as the norm, it was the normal thing to do, there was nothing extraordinary about it.  It was just that my mother did a lot more than anybody else [laughs] along with having to go out to work, you know.
MM:	And when you weren’t working, apart from evening recreation, was there any chance of a family holiday or what did you do during school holidays?
SC:	Not a family holiday as such, no.  I do remember going, my first real holiday when I was eleven, that was long after [pause] that would have been 1947.  But Mammy would occasionally [pause] she had a brother living in Derry, and she’d occasionally go up to him for a few days.  You know, she’d manage that, maybe go up for the weekend, and this was her little holiday away, maybe you know, just [pause] I can’t even remember what sort of holidays she had, it was probably two weeks, you know.  And we’d have visitors, I mean our cousins and that would visit us, from Derry and so we never had a family holiday.  They used to go on family holidays before Daddy had his stroke.
MM:	That was before your time then?
SC:	Yes.
MM:	And was there very much physical labour involved for her in caring for your father?
SC:	No, he was great, he could actually [pause] he could dress himself; he had it brought to a fine art.  But he was totally paralysed, I mean, if he was going out [pause] all of us, did it, we were there, there were the collar detached shirts at the time, with the stud at the back, and we used to have to put his collar on and tie his tie for him, and always when he was going out [pause] he was always very well dressed, and the bad hand, his left hand, he had to tuck it into his pocket, and he used a stick.
MM:	So he could walk?
SC:	Oh he could walk, now with difficulty, but very, very independent, very determined.  Very much so.
MM:	And did he get physiotherapy or anything, even in Guinness’s?
SC:	No, there was nothing.  In fact, when the stroke happened, he was brought to Jervis Street, and he was just left there for about two or three days until he signed himself out.  There was nobody looking after him so he was better off at home.  You know, if you had a stroke in those days, Mary, there was no no speech therapy, there was nothing.  There was nothing.  If you had a stroke, tough.  There was no treatment for a stroke in the 1930s.
MM:	And in terms of [pause] your older sisters, when they did go out to work in terms of their age?
SC:	Well, once again, she was, Gwenny probably went to work when she was about fourteen or fifteen, and Kathleen was the same.  But then like, Mammy was always very conscious of the importance of education, so Marie, probably at great financial cost to herself, Marie stayed on to do her Inter. and did a secretarial course, and you know, moved away from so-called working class.  And then, between Marie and my mother, I was persuaded to stay on to do the Leaving.  You know, and she was so thrilled [pause] you know, when the two of her girls had gone to secondary school, you know.  She was very conscious of that, she was a very intelligent woman; very [pause] there was always music and books and everything in the house, even though she had no formal education herself.  She was amazing.
MM:	And you say she didn’t really talk about her family, so did you ever have any connection with the extended family?
SC:	Oh we did, I mean, her aunt [pause] now I didn’t say she didn’t talk about her family, it was her upbringing.  No, she had one sister and one brother, and Auntie Wally, that was her sister, she lived off the South Circular Road, quite near, you know, where they all came from that area, you know Daddy used to live in Emor Street, and then Uncle Martin lived in Derry, he married a Derry woman and he used to come and she used to visit him, and we used to visit Auntie Wally and I used to go and stay for a few days.  No, we did [pause] now not as much as nowadays, we had no phone or anything, but we did keep in touch.  More with Mammy’s family than with Daddy’s.  But we did keep in touch with Daddy’s too, to an extent, one of his sisters still lived in Emor Street and we used to visit her a couple of times a year.  
MM:	Would they have been able to help at all?
SC:	No, I was never conscious of that.  I don’t think my mother would have accepted it; there was no way she would have taken help from anybody.  But certainly, Auntie Wally had five children of her own, her husband was a cabinet maker, and I always felt that we were better off than they were.  I always did, I always felt that you know we were certainly better fed!  Because my mother was so ingenious [laughs].
MM:	And where did she come in terms of her own family? Was she the oldest?
SC:	She was, she was the eldest and Auntie Wally was about three years younger than her, I think, and Uncle Martin was [pause] Auntie Wally was eight years younger than her, so then perhaps Martin came between, I’m not quite sure where he came, he may have come between the two of them.  But Auntie Wally, I know she was eight years younger than Mammy.
MM:	So, this remarkable woman was doing all of this; as you grew older, did that make you feel intimidated in following her or just determined that you weren’t going to let her down in how you approached life?
SC:	I never thought of it formally like that, Mary, never.  We just developed in a natural sort of way, there was nothing very formal like ‘I must do this because my mother [pause]’.   No I just, more or less, went my own way.  My mother was always there and always very interested in what you were doing, you know, if you went to a dance, did you meet anyone you liked better than yourself, you know [laughs].  And she was always there for us, but I never felt, no, I never felt intimidated, no way.  We had a great - we had a brilliant upbringing.  A very happy childhood, you know, never really [pause] we would have liked another bit of spud, maybe, like that [laughs] but we never, ever felt, I never felt deprived as a child, never.
MM:	It doesn’t sound like you were [both laugh].
SC:	Even in the garden, like, we’d all be pottering around, helping her do the lettuces and [pause] you know, we never, it was a very, very good childhood, a very good upbringing.
MM:	And in terms of your neighbourhood, you say it was quite mixed, but that was a relatively novel development, the Marino area, and it seemed, you know, that some of the ideas behind it, the size of the streets and everything, recognising that Dublin life was going to be changing, there were going to be more cards, better bus routes, would there have been many cars on your street, for instance, belonging to your neighbours?
SC:	No, no, in fact, I mean, as a child, once again during the period that you’re interested in, I mean, we would play skipping across the road, and you’d only rarely occasionally have to put the rope down to let a horse and cart through, never, maybe a bicycle, cars were very, very rare.  Very much so.
MM:	Going into town, obviously there was petrol rationing, but would you have had any friends that, after the war when the rationing was no longer there, that there were a lot of cars [pause]
SC:	No, [pause] we certainly didn’t have cars.  The first sort of, funnily enough now, when I was eleven and the first holiday that I went on, and my father used, from time to time he’d take a turn, as somebody would say, and I remember he was particularly ill that week and my only concern was that I wouldn’t get to go on my holiday.  You’re like that at eleven, you know [laughs] and I remember his brother, whom we seldom saw, came over to visit him, and the one thing [pause] my Daddy recovered and lived for a good many years after [pause] but one thing I remember about that is that this man had a car and the idea of getting a lift to the station in the car was brilliant [laughs].  You know, so obviously there were very, very few cars.  Very few.
MM:	And how did you get on that holiday?  You got a lift, was that to the train station?
SC:	Yeah, and got the train then down to Wexford and then you were picked up in the pony and trap from the farm where we stayed, you know.
MM:	Farm life wouldn’t have been as exciting to you as a city child, as to somebody who’d had no contact with the hens and everything?
SC:	Yeah, that’s true but it was still exciting, it was brilliant because you were away from home [laughs], it was brilliant.  
MM:	Despite this lovely home [laughs]?
SC:	[Laughs]  We all wanted to get away.
MM:	And from your Mum’s point of view, obviously I’m just stunned by how resourceful she was, but would she have ever talked about her working day, or the people she met or might be working for?
SC:	Only if she met up with some old biddy who was giving her trouble or grief, but the various ladies that she worked with, we’d know them by name so obviously she did talk about them.  And there was another woman up the road, I can’t remember her name this minute, and she worked as a cleaner in the Civil Service, and they used to meet.  I always woke up when Mammy was going out, now this was later when she could get a bus, and I used to lie in bed awake and I’d hear Mammy going out and I’d hear the door shutting and I’d hear Mrs. [pause] I can’t remember the woman’s name, but her footsteps coming down the road, and it’d be still dark, and then the two of them toddling off down Carlton Road to get the bus on the main road at the back of Fairview Park, which wasn’t too bad, she could get a bus, and then in the last [pause] oh maybe five or ten years that she was working in the Brewery, the Brewery laid on a bus to collect them from town.  So that, it took a lot of the hassle but like, when she needed that, she had to walk, when there were no buses, she had to walk all the way.
MM:	That’s quite a distance, it must have been at least four or five miles.  
SC:	Yes, when you think of it, all the way into town and then all the way up the quays and up Watling Street and up into the Brewery there.  Yes, it was a heck of a walk.
MM:	So, she was doing very hard physical labour first thing in the morning and then she was carrying all the shopping home, quite a long distance as well.
SC:	She probably walked from the Brewery down to town to get the bus and she probably would have had this black shopping bag with her, carrying the kindling and maybe an oul’ bottle of paint of something in it as well, because I think our house was painted with paint out of Guinness’s which came home in a milk bottle with sellotape or something over the top, you know [both laugh].
MM:	I’m not sure she’d get away with it today.
SC:	No, probably not.  But one of her favourite pastimes was going to the cinema, she’d toddle off to the cinema on her own or she’d bring me with her, you know, so that was one of her [pause] she did relax and she did find the time.  I don’t know [pause]
MM:	And what sort of films did she like?
SC:	Oh, they’d probably be romances.  You know, she used to read, probably romances, but she probably [pause] there weren’t very many sort of intellectual films being made then, really, that came on the general screens, they were mostly [pause] sort of, light enough.  But she liked to go to the cinema; she’d go to the cinema about once a week.
MM:	And how much would that have cost, would you remember?
SC:	Well, I remember going to the pictures at the weekend, this would have been when I was about eight or nine, the others then would have been working and I’d be going around cadging for the money, and I know it was 7d into the pictures in the Fairview.  Whether it was the same at night or for adults I don’t know, but I remember that, to go round them all and manage to get 7d out of them [laughs]. 
MM:	And you were able to go by yourself then, or with friends?
SC:	We used to go mostly to the matinees, we’d queue up, there would be a big crowd.
MM:	As you got a little bit older then, coming into your adolescence, how did she deal with things like the changes in your body and just telling you the facts of life?
SC:	She was very embarrassed [laughs].  Very embarrassed and I think, I was about [pause] I was ready to have a period and she sort of, just sideways told me, like you know, that [pause] I can’t remember how she [pause] I do remember being in the bedroom at the time.  I can’t remember how she put it but she more or less told me, in a very sideways and offhand way, about sanitary towels.  But sure, I knew all this anyway [laughs] at this stage, you know.
MM:	Was that from your friends?
SC:	Oh yeah, I probably put her out of her misery (both laugh).  
MM:	And did you ever, she hadn’t spoken about her upbringing, so you didn’t know kind of what she’d been told by her mother, you wouldn’t have gone into that?
SC:	No, although her mother now, was living, her mother was actually living with Auntie Wally, my grandfather was dead at the time, and em, she was em, now she was a matriarch.  I was terrified of her [pause] she was probably quite [pause] Now Anne has a different picture of her altogether, my cousin, who lived in the house with her, but I used to be terrified of her, I wouldn’t open my mouth.  Mammy never spoke of her upbringing; and I never, you just didn’t talk about things like that.  I don’t know how she managed, I really don’t.
MM:	Was your Mum still around then when you had your first children and what was her reaction to that?
SC:	Well, she was delighted but once again, I remember up in our back bedroom at home, and I [pause] I suppose I was about eight months pregnant and she [pause] she wasn’t very well at that stage, she’d started to suffer from her nerves, but she was, sort of, I think it was something to do with if the waters broke, you’d go to hospital immediately, but that was the only conversation we had about having children or anything, we just didn’t talk about it, ever.  There’s one thing I remember saying, funnily enough, I remember being out in Howth with her one time, and somebody’s daughter got pregnant, out of wedlock and funny enough, Mammy spoke of that, and she said in as many words that, I think this girl had been thrown out of her home, that she would never do that.  As much as to say, like you know, I mean don’t go, don’t be stupid, but if anything happens, come to me, you know.  She didn’t put it in as many words but I knew what she was getting at, I was probably about eighteen at the time, maybe nineteen, I can’t remember.  But that was her attitude, that if you did have a child, you know, that she would look after you, she certainly wouldn’t be like, at that stage, to be just left like so many, just hidden under the carpet, you know.
MM:	In terms of your mother’s broader attitudes, was she very religious?
SC:	I think she would have liked to be.  She loved the idea of the cosiness of it but she was very sceptical as well.  She was, she went to Mass and she went to Communion and all that sort of jazz, as I say, I think she would have liked it because it was sort of a comfortable idea, set beside what she was going through, but she didn’t have time to get involved so she never did, and she quite sceptical, you know, and Daddy was very sceptical.  But they used to go to Mass just the same.  I mean one didn’t not go to Mass.
MM:	Was that because of peer pressure?
SC:	Yes, because of the neighbours.  Everybody around was Catholic.
MM:	And what about the local priest’s involvement, for instance at times of real hardship when your Dad first got sick?
SC:	Well, I wasn’t born when Daddy first got sick so I’ve no idea, but I never recall any help, any support at all.  None whatsoever.
MM:	You know, groups like the Vincent de Paul [pause] presumably with your mother’s independence that would have been anathema?
SC:	I think my mother was more likely to give to the Vincent de Paul than take things from them.  You know, she was amazing, I mean, she certainly never had recourse to the Vincent de Paul, in fact I remember one time we’d a settee, quite a nice settee, and she gave it to the scouts for their den.  You know, that was my mother, a very proud lady, very proud, at the back of it all, she was.  No, she would not have taken anything from them.
MM:	So she managed on very meagre financial resources and you weren’t deprived and were well looked after [pause] when it came time that there was extra money coming in from yourself and your sisters first, how was that divided, did they hand up the money to her?
SC:	Well we always contributed from our [pause] you know, from our salary or wages, whatever you like to call it, we always did and I remember when I started work, in 1954, my wages were £4.2.2 and you gave £3 to your mother.  And then, a year later, I was promoted.  I did an exam and I was promoted, and I got, I always remember these figures, £5.10.10 and I still gave £3 to my mother but at that stage, before that, when I only had the £4.2.2 she still dressed me, but now I had £5.10.10, she still got £3 and I dressed myself [laughs].
MM:	The older sisters would have given the same sort of proportions, when they started?
SC:	I’ve no idea, but I imagine so, yes.  Everybody contributed and mostly it went on food and it mostly went on the house, you know, making things more comfortable and having [pause] you know, not worrying about firing, things like that.  But everybody contributed from the start.
MM:	In terms of buying the house through the rental; what proportion of the income would that have been?  Would you have any idea how expensive it was?
SC:	I remember, because we used to have to go down to pay the rent and it was something like 18s a week, now that was an awful [pause] that was a huge amount in those days.  That was why, you know, this was a huge lump that went out of her few bob every week and that’s why the family used to say for God’s sake, sell your interest, you’d have a little nest egg which probably would have been about £30 or something, that was a nest egg, you know, but she just wouldn’t she was determined to buy the house.
MM:	And what was the term?
SC:	It was 40 years, so far as I remember.  It was 40 years, that was why it was so low, as far as I recall it was 40 years, you know, which you’d never get now.  Our mortgage, which we took over when it was 10 years old, it’d only go for 35 years, so 40 years possibly was the norm then, I don’t know.
MM:	I’ve always thought they were very attractive houses, you know.  Would your mum have talked about when she moved into it the first time, whether it would have particularly appealed to her or whether she was just pleased to have her own home?
SC:	I think she was pleased to have her own home but I think it was probably also the only house they could afford you know, because of it being a Corporation house, the maintenance, if anything went wrong.  That was another thing, my devious mother [laughs] if she wanted the bedroom decorated she caused the chimney breast, the chimney to go on fire and the Corporation would come out and examine it, and the chimney breast would be a little bit cracked so she’d have to paper the room [both laugh].  That’s a fact, Mary; that happened several times.
MM:	And nobody in the Corporation ever twigged?
SC:	Ah, they probably thought she was great, this little woman papering the room [laughs].  They never questioned it, never, but maintenance was included in the rent, you know, which was probably [pause] particularly when Daddy was sick, it was a big help.  But this was nothing, she used to wallpaper and paint, she used to do all that, she’d paint the outside and inside.
MM:	Right up to the top of the house?
SC:	Oh yes, oh yes, she did everything and probably Desmond did the outside then, when he was older, but I remember when I was 16 and my mother at that stage would have been 52, and I remember thinking, she’s over 50 and she’s done enough, and at that stage I took over and did all the wallpapering and painting from then on, you know, and I hope like, that it was a help to her, but at least I had enough savvy at 16 to say well, my mother’s 52 and she shouldn’t be getting up on ladders wallpapering.       
MM:	You were still at school at that stage.  Did she have contact with your teachers and play an active role from that point of view?
SC:	You must be joking [laughs] [pause] the Irish Sisters of Charity.  Sister Mary Delalus, I’m sure you’ve heard of her [laughs].  She was notorious in the city of Dublin.  The only contact my mother had with the school was when she was sent for because I had misbehaved and I probably told you that story [pause]
MM:	No?
SC:	When I was fourteen or so, and I was waiting for my pal who lived in Marino also to come out and she was the class captain, and I was outside on the pavement, I was almost oblivious to boys, and with the long, black knitted stockings, and I was [pause] you know the way you’d be jumping off the kerb and on to the road and off the kerb, that’s what I was doing, but we happened to be quite near Bolton Street Tech and this woman was looking out the window.  She saw me doing this and the boys happened to be coming out of Bolton Street Tech at the time and I can honestly say I wasn’t even aware of them.  She called me in, sent for my poor unfortunate mother, who had more to do, and told my mother I was shaping in front of the boys.  [Both laugh].
MM:	How did your mother react?
SC:	Ah, she told her where to put herself [both laugh].  That’s true; no that was about the only type of contact, or going maybe to the sale of work every year, or the school play or whatever.
MM:	So parents’ input wasn’t welcomed?
SC:	It was absolutely nil.  They just did not figure, definitely, end of story, did not figure.
MM:	And you did Leaving Cert [pause] what sort of things would you have been doing in the school - this was what, a Catholic girls secondary school?
SC:	We were the first girls secondary school in Dublin to do a science subject, and our class was the first one to do it, and that was physiology, and we were the first [pause] so she, afterwards I realised that this nun, I mean, God love her, this was the only non fee-paying school in Dublin, that’s why I was at it, and she wanted [pause] we all came from relatively poor backgrounds and by God, she was going to get us into permanent and pensionable jobs, if she had to kill us to do it.  And most of us did.  You know, so, like [pause] in a very [pause] in her own narrow way she [pause] all she did was for our good but she went about it in a terribly peculiar way.  But we did the usual English, Irish, French, Geography, History and physiology was the one thing that [pause] we’d a lot of music, we’d a lot of music in that school and it was good.  We used to do a play or a musical every year and we used to do drill displays and things, like it was, for a non-fee paying school in the early fifties, it was very good, the results were always brilliant.  
MM:	What about things like domestic science [pause] was there any emphasis on the usual thing that you hear from schooling of the period, that of course, your education would stop in terms of you getting married?
SC:	Oh no, no that was never said.  They never thought, people didn’t think like that, you probably presumed that you’d go to work for five or six years, you’d get married, you’d have your children, because that was the way things were.

Sheila Interview, 5th April 1998

SC1

